Airbus technical magazine
January 2016
#57
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
4255##TTSSAAFF
2200
Your Airbus technical magazine is now on tablet
The articles in this magazine appear in 2015 QTR-4 and 2016 QTR-1
iOS (iPad)
Android
& Windows
See a 3D A380 float on the cover of this magazine!
To complement the Augmented Reality article (page 28) use your tablet to see how Augmented Reality markers work
Step1: Either browse your tablet’s app store and download the FAST magazine app or scan the QR code above.
Step 2: Download the Augmented Reality reader app that is shown in the Augmented Reality article.
Step 3: Point the camera of your tablet at this magazine cover, and you will see the reality of the cover ‘augmented’
with a three-dimensional A380 on the surface of the magazine.
The app uses the cover as markers to position the 3D model.
You can then move around the A380 by moving either your tablet or the magazine cover.
75#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#57
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Chief Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD
TAT optimizer 04
Design: PONT BLEU
Airbus’ Turn Around Time & operations optimizer
Cover image: Daren Birchall
Printer: Amadio
Airbus Cockpit Experience 10
Authorisation for reprinting FAST magazine
articles should be requested from the editor A new vision for flight crew training
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
A350 XWB composite repairs 16
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Analysis and repair of in-service damage
FAST magazine is available on internet to composite structure
www.airbus.com/support/publications
and on tablets
Virtual Reality & 3D 22
ISSN 1293-5476
for Technical Data
Augmented Reality in Airbus 28
© AIRBUS 2016 New opportunities to assist aircraft
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
maintenance and engineering
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified SB configuration management 34
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any The efficient way to make Service Bulletins simpler
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in FAST from the past 38
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be We’ve got it covered 39
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Where you see these icons,
Photo copyright Airbus videos or slide shows are available
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Flight Test Photo Lab, Airbus Group on the iPad, Android & Windows
Corporate Heritage, Master Films, EXM company, Philippe Masclet, Hervé Goussé, app versions of FAST magazine.
Axel Dreyer, Frédéric Lancelot, A.Doumenjou, Loïc Le Meur
Your Airbus technical magazine is now on tablet
The articles in this magazine appear in 2015 QTR-4 and 2016 QTR-1
iOS (iPad)
Android
& Windows
75#TSAF
40
TAT optimizer
Airbus’ Turn Around Time & operations optimizer
Improving an aircraft’s ‘pit stop’ performance
An aircraft on ground is an aircraft that does not bring revenue to an airline. During the
turn-around time, there are many activities happening in and around the aircraft such
as catering, baggage operations, refuelling and cleaning. It is similar to what happens
during the pit stop of a Formula 1 race. At a pit stop, everyone is working to optimize
the performance of the team. But during an aircraft turn-around, everyone is working
to optimize their own performance; not necessarily the overall performance. This can
not only cost time and money to the airline, but also lead to a late departure with the
risk of losing the slot with Air Traffic Control.
Article by (left to right)
Netra GOWDA
Real-time analysis
Innovation Manager
AIRBUS To improve the global performance, we fall back on the maxim, “If you cannot
Netra.Gowda@airbus.com measure it, you cannot improve it” (William THOMSON, Lord KELVIN – 1824-1907).
Aircraft’s computers record even when on ground. They measure how long the doors
Ashutosh AGRAWAL
are open, how long it takes to refuel, how long the aircraft is hooked up to the
Innovation Manager
ground-service power cart, and more. This data allows objective performance
AIRBUS
measurement of the ground servicing in real-time. Also the computers aboard the
Ashutosh.Agrawal@airbus.com
aircraft can provide this data on every leg of its journey.
The Airbus solution known as Turn-Around-Time & operations optimizer (TAT optimizer)
was conceived at Airbus by the Emerging Technologies & Concepts group in Bangalore
(India), based on ethnographic market research. Research covered airlines, airports
and passengers. The first proof of concept was developed by a cross-functional team
(coming from systems, architecture and integration, flight test, cabin engineering and
Customer Services’ departments) to demonstrate the feasibility. Since then, with
Airbus’ Corporate Innovation sponsorship, TAT optimizer has been further developed
and enhanced for testing and deployment with customers.
75#TSAF
50
TAT optimizer
With this new solution, airlines can perform real-time monitoring of on-ground aircraft
activities. It does not require any costly and time consuming hardware changes.
The aircraft itself is at the centre of the performance improvement by giving real-time
visibility to what is happening on ground. Potential departure delays are systematically
integrated into the airline’s decision process in order to minimize disruptions to their
ground service schedule. The real-time information also becomes input for the
Airport-Collaborative Decision Making (A-CDM) for Target Off-Block Time (TOBT)
calculation and tracking.
The solution enables remote fleet-wide monitoring to support tactical decisions like
fleet swapping, crew rostering, etc. The collected data is used to benchmark the
performance of ground-handling activities, pinpoint areas of weakness and identify
improvement areas for schedule performance.
0:10:05
Benchmarking of deplaning duration (by aircraft type and airport) - illustrative
0:08:38
00::1007::0152
00::0085::3486
00::0074::1129
00::0052::4563 Maximum of Actual Deplaning duration
00::0041::1296 Average of Planned Deplaning duration
00::0020::5030 MMainxiimmuumm ooff AAccttuuaall DDeeppllaanniinngg dduurraattiioonn
0:01:26 BLR HKG LHR SIN CDG MEL SFO Average of Planned Deplaning duration
A320 A320 A330 A330 A330 A350-900A350-900
Minimum of Actual Deplaning duration
0:00:00
BLR HKG LHR SIN CDG MEL SFO
A320 A320 A330 A330 A330 A350-900A350-900
Benchmarking of deplaning start delays (by airport) - illustrative
0:03:36
0:02:53
0:03:36
0:02:10
0:02:53
0:01:26
0:02:10 Maximum of Deplaning Start delay
0:00:43 Average of Deplaning Start delay
0:01:26
No data MMainxiimmuumm ooff DDeeppllaanniinngg SSttaarrtt ddeellaayy
0:00:00
0:00:43 Average of Deplaning Start delay
No data Minimum of Deplaning Start delay
0:00:00
BLR HKG LHR SIN CDG MEL SFO
The solutBioLRn is HnKoGw geLaHRred toSI NcoveCrD aGctivMitEieLs froSmFO touchdown to take-off like taxi-in,
turn-around activities and taxi-out. The various turn-around activities monitored are
deplaning, boarding, cabin cleaning, catering, cargo unloading and loading, bulk
unloading and loading, refuelling, water servicing, waste servicing and brake cooling.
The data related to these activities are transmitted by the aircraft in real-time to a
‘cloud platform’. The data is processed and then presented to users via an intuitive
interface on portable devices.
Airport - Collaborative Decision The TOBT (Target Off-Block Time)
Making (A-CDM) is a joint venture is a point in time to be monitored and
between ACI Europe, EUROCONTROL, confirmed by the airline/handling agent
International Air Transport Association at which the ground handling process is
(IATA) and the Civil Air Navigation concluded, all aircraft doors are closed,
Services Organisation (CANSO) which all passenger boarding bridges have been
aims to improve the operational efficiency removed from the aircraft and thus
of all airport operators by reducing start-up approval and push-back/taxi
delays, increasing the predictability clearance can be received.
of events as the flight progresses and All ground handling processes, except
optimising the utilisation of resources. push-back and de-icing, are based
on the TOBT.
75#TSAF
60
TAT optimizer
The TAT optimizer
The TAT optimizer rationalizes and gives a real-time overview of each and every intervention needed for
a swift and efficient turn-around. Priority information such as the aircraft and schedule information along
with alert messages are set in the interface header.
Planned turn-around activities are laid out in a Gantt chart denoting the scheduled arrival and departure.
Their layout is configured by the airline according to its operations and may also be stored as a template.
The arrival of the aircraft at gate is represented as a blue line on the interface. As the turn-around unfolds,
the current time is denoted by a continuously moving red line from left to right. There are several visual
indicators built in, to highlight the current status, the actions due and exceptional events at a glance.
The border of the activity bar turns ‘green’ if it is due to start, and turns ‘red’ if delayed. When the activity
starts, the bar starts filling up in ‘green’ as the activity progresses. If the scheduled stop time is exceeded,
then the fill colour turns ‘hashed green’ and ‘amber. This helps to alert a ground handler when his/her
activity is due to start and when it is due for completion. When the activity is completed, the time overrun
is filled as ‘amber’. These visual indications also enable a ramp manager or a dispatcher to recognize at
a glance which activities present a risk and he can then react accordingly.
Dependent tasks such as catering, cleaning, refuelling, cargo loading and unloading, are also highlighted
on the interface. If the previous task overruns, the overlap is shown on the dependent task bar as a ‘red’ line.
This provides an alert that dependent activities can delay the aircraft’s departure and hence are required
to speed up. The inbuilt algorithms continuously process the data to identify critical paths and predict the
potential departure delay in minutes. This allows ample time for ground handlers and airline personnel to
organize themselves to address the cause of the delay. Also, the brake cooling time, which decides the
minimum turn-around time, is predicted at block-on* and updated at regular intervals.
Apart from the detailed Gantt view, there is a summary view which contains only the header information.
This aids airline personnel to monitor the status of several aircraft at the same time. The arrival time turns
blue with block-on. The departure time can turn amber if the delay is predicted. If the aircraft departs as
scheduled, then it turns blue again. When all the turn-around activities are complete and the aircraft is ready
for pushback, the turn-around time turns green. The alert messages are also part of the header to inform
about any exceptional events.
The data driving the TAT optimizer interface comes from the aircraft. Deplaning starts when the passenger
door is opened. The start and finish of cargo unloading and loading is triggered by the opening and closing
of the cargo doors. Refuelling is monitored with the help of refuel commands and the fuel level. The solution
is also capable of taking data from the crew via a mobile interface, from the airline information systems and
other known reliable sources.
Over a period of time, this data can reveal extremely valuable information.
Careful analysis can determine benchmark performance of various ground handling activities,
identify root causes of delays and non-obvious improvement areas which are lost in routine work.
An airline can use these data analytics capabilities to boost their Incentive & Performance (I&P)
programme at their operating airports.
Also, the TAT optimizer enables them to:
• Discover and evaluate possible performance problems before the schedule is established,
• Plan turn-around frequency and optimal durations,
• Manage network interdependencies.
While providing the above capabilities, TAT optimizer invariably addresses some important comportment
aspects. The objective aircraft data reduces conflict, eliminates negotiations (typically seen when assigning
delay codes) and assigns clear responsibilities. In addition, the solution ensures a shared understanding
for all stakeholders with the ability to share alerts/concerns with others. This gives a sense of teamwork
(similar to that of the pit stop team in Formula 1) to every stakeholder who in their current environment
is usually disconnected and uninterested.
TAT optimizer was conceived to be truly agnostic. Not only does the software function on any type of
device (multi-platform), but it also works on any aircraft type, any airport and can be remotely accessed
* Aircraft arrival at gate
from anywhere in the world (coming soon on smart watches!). Also, the solution is capable of integrating
is block-on.
with airlines’ legacy information systems and complies with future data standards of Air Traffic Management Aircraft departure
(ATM) improvement initiatives. TAT optimizer has been presented to various airlines and they have all from gate is block-off.
confirmed their interest, and one has already started trials.
Steps throughout the TAT optimizer’s monitoring (mock examples)
Deplaning going beyond planned completion time. Dependent activities (catering, cleaning and refueling)
highlighted. Following input from cabin crew on cause of deplaning delay, an alert message is given
to all stakeholders concerning its cause.
A F 3 - 5 W 0 W -9 B 0 A 0 AI 0 B S 9 0 Y :5 2 D 0 BA ( 1 -0 0 : : 4 0 8 2 ) AI 1 B L 0 0 A :5 3 X 1 BA
09:40 09:45 09:50 09:55 10:00 10:05 10:10 10:15 10:20 10:25 10:30 10:35 10:40 10:45 10:50 10:55
Deplaning Boarding
Catering
Cleaning
Cargo Unload Cargo loading
Bulk Unload Bulk loading
Refueling
Potable water servicing
Toilet servicing
Stakeholders having been informed of the prediction of potential delay of 3 mins to flight departure,
dependent activities start. Potential delay alert (amber) remains. Stakeholders work to recover delay.
A F 3 - 5 W 0 W -9 B 0 A 0 AI 0 B S 9 0 Y :5 2 D 0 BA ( 1 -0 0 : : 4 0 8 2 ) AI 1 B L 0 0 A :5 3 X 1 BA
09:40 09:45 09:50 09:55 10:00 10:05 10:10 10:15 10:20 10:25 10:30 10:35 10:40 10:45 10:50 10:55
Deplaning Boarding
Catering
Cleaning
Cargo Unload Cargo loading
Bulk Unload Bulk loading
Refueling
Potable water servicing
Toilet servicing
Having cascaded into catering and cleaning, the stakeholders recover the delay by completing the catering
and cleaning in a shorter duration.
A F 3 - 5 W 0 W -9 B 0 A 0 AI 0 B S 9 0 Y :5 2 D 0 BA ( 1 -0 0 : : 4 0 8 2 ) AI 1 B L 0 0 A :5 3 X 1 BA
09:40 09:45 09:50 09:55 10:00 10:05 10:10 10:15 10:20 10:25 10:30 10:35 10:40 10:45 10:50 10:55
Deplaning Boarding
Catering
Cleaning
Cargo Unload Cargo loading
Bulk Unload Bulk loading
Refueling
Potable water servicing
Toilet servicing
All activities complete (green). Aircraft ready for departure on schedule. The turn-around data is frozen.
A F 3 - 5 W 0 W -9 B 0 A 0 AI 0 B S 9 0 Y :5 2 D 0 BA ( 1 -0 0 : : 4 0 8 2 ) AI 1 B L 0 0 A :5 3 X 1 BA
09:40 09:45 09:50 09:55 10:00 10:05 10:10 10:15 10:20 10:25 10:30 10:35 10:40 10:45 10:50 10:55
Deplaning Boarding
Catering
Cleaning
Cargo Unload Cargo loading
Bulk Unload Bulk loading
Refueling
Potable water servicing
Toilet servicing
75#TSAF
70
TAT optimizer
75#TSAF
70
Buffers consumption (between aircraft ready and departure) analysis
0:08:38
0:07:12
0:05:46
0:04:19 Average of Planned buffer between ‘Aircraft ready’
and ‘Block-off’
0:02:53
Average of idle time between ‘Aircraft ready’ and ‘Block-off’
0:01:26
0:00:00 Max of idle time between ‘Aircraft ready’ and ‘Block-off’
A320 A350-900 A320 A330 A350-900 A350-900 A330
BLR CDG HKG LHR MEL SFO SIN
Buffers/Idle times on a theoretical critical path
0:12:58
0:11:31
0:10:05
0:08:38
0:07:12 Average of Deplaning to Catering idle time
0:05:46 Average of Deplaning to Catering idle time
0:04:19 Average of Cleaning to Boarding idle time
0:02:53 Average of Catering to Boarding idle time
0:01:26 Average of idle time between ‘Aircraft ready’ and ’Block-off’
0:00:00 Average of Un-used buffer between ‘Block-on
and Deplaning start’
A320 A350-900 A320 A330 A350-900 A350-900 A330
BLR CDG HKG LHR MEL SFO SIN
Root-cause analysis of delays
2 Count of Delay Departure
Count of Delay in pushback
Count of Delay by Bulk loading
1 Count of Delay by Catering
Count of Delay by Cleaning
Count of Delay by Deplaning
0 Count of Delay by Skybridge positioning
A320 A350-900 A320 A330 A350-900 A350-900 A330
BLR CDG HKG LHR MEL SFO SIN
75#TSAF
80
TAT optimizer
The TAT optimizer
is multi-platform.
Not only is the
software compatible
on all devices, but it
also works on any
aircraft type.
illustrative
illustrative
illustrative
Buffers consumption (between aircraft ready and departure) analysis
0:08:38
0:07:12
0:05:46
0:04:19 Average of Planned buffer between ‘Aircraft ready’
and ‘Block-off’
0:02:53
Average of idle time between ‘Aircraft ready’ and ‘Block-off’
0:01:26
0:00:00 Max of idle time between ‘Aircraft ready’ and ‘Block-off’
A320 A350-900 A320 A330 A350-900 A350-900 A330
BLR CDG HKG LHR MEL SFO SIN
Buffers/Idle times on a theoretical critical path
0:12:58
0:11:31
0:10:05
0:08:38
0:07:12 Average of Deplaning to Catering idle time
0:05:46 Average of Deplaning to Catering idle time
0:04:19 Average of Cleaning to Boarding idle time
0:02:53 Average of Catering to Boarding idle time
0:01:26 Average of idle time between ‘Aircraft ready’ and ’Block-off’
0:00:00 Average of Un-used buffer between ‘Block-on
and Deplaning start’
A320 A350-900 A320 A330 A350-900 A350-900 A330
BLR CDG HKG LHR MEL SFO SIN
Root-cause analysis of delays
2 Count of Delay Departure
Count of Delay in pushback
Count of Delay by Bulk loading
1 Count of Delay by Catering
Count of Delay by Cleaning
Count of Delay by Deplaning
0 Count of Delay by Skybridge positioning
A320 A350-900 A320 A330 A350-900 A350-900 A330
BLR CDG HKG LHR MEL SFO SIN
75#TSAF
90
TAT optimizer
The TAT optimizers
of an entire fleet
can be seen on
the control centre’s
summary view
The future roadmap of TAT optimizer includes performing real-time video analytics on the feeds from cabin cameras.
This would enhance the visibility of cabin activities and help measure progress. A module to speed-up boarding is proposed
by streamlining the order in which seats are filled. Patent disclosures have been filed on current and planned developments.
Also, the solution will be integrated with other complementary modules, such as maintenance.
Benefits
At turn-around level: At fleet level: At schedule level:
• Real-time aircraft turn-around visibility by leveraging • Remote monitoring of • Integrated network-wide
objective aircraft data, fleet-wide ground status business view of turn-around
and potential risks, schedule and planning,
• Improved situational awareness and efficient
coordination of ground activities, • Decision support for aircraft • Discover and evaluate possible
swapping, crew rostering, performance problems prior to
• Inbuilt predictions and warnings for proactive
the schedule being established,
decision-making to minimize schedule disruptions, • Enable dynamic prioritisation
and ground resource • Business insight to plan
• Shared understanding for all the internal and external
deployment. turn-around frequency and
stakeholders for system level optimization,
duration reduction/optimization.
• Input to A-CDM for TOBT calculation and tracking.
A-CDM: Airport-Collaborative Decision Making
TOBT: Target Off Block Time
CONCLUSION
Airbus’ TAT optimizer substantiates a crucial point that activity data of the turn-around time is valuable.
And intelligence on top of that data is an area where Airbus can naturally contribute and create value for
its customers. An intelligent and connected aircraft offers benefits not only to the airlines, but also to
overall Air Traffic Management and passengers’ satisfaction. Future endeavours in this direction will
include connecting aircraft and an on-board integration of TAT optimizer with the Electronic Flight Bag
(EFB), the cabin logbook and the Cabin Intercommunication Data System (CIDS).
75#TSAF
01
Airbus Cockpit Experience
75#TSAF
11
Airbus Cockpit Experience
ACE
by name,
ACE by nature
A new vision for
flight crew training
Article by
Captain Christian NORDEN
Flight Operations Expert Pilot “Airbus’ new training model is set to become
AIRBUS
the new benchmark for airliner type rating training”1
Christian.Norden@airbus.com
“...a revolutionary training system” 2
These are just two among many public comments on Airbus’ successful new pilot
training concept.
Let’s take a look at the rationales for changing the way airline pilots are trained
and an in depth description of the tool that stands at the core of the new
instructional philosophy: the ACE (Airbus Cockpit Experience) trainer - a portable
simulator which even enables you to take your Airbus cockpit home with you.
Why did Airbus decide to change its well proven pilot training programmes?
Training instructors and examiners at Airbus, as well as industry observers have
noted that flight crew training requirements in regulations have traditionally been
driven by the conclusions of hull losses from jets in the 1960s and 1970s.
Additional incidents and accidents have subsequently added to training requirements
resulting in an inventory or ‘tick box’ approach that saturated recurrent training and
checking programmes.
At the same time, aircraft design and reliability improved substantially, leading to a
situation where many accidents occurred with aircraft that were operating without
any malfunction. It was apparent that the training philosophy had to be reviewed.
Airbus has supported the International Air Transport Association (IATA) Evidence
Based Training (EBT) initiative since 2009.
1 Aerospace, January 2015
2 Flight Global, November 2014
75#TSAF
21
Airbus Cockpit Experience
What is Evidence Based Training?
A core principle of EBT is to develop a set of pilot’s competencies (rather than
training tasks as in the traditional “tick-box” concept); “You should train the
reason of the outcome of a particular event not the outcome itself” is the
message passed to trainers and EBT recurrent training designers.
When the pilot training programme for the new A350 was conceptualized, Airbus
decided to adopt EBT principles where suitable even in the new Type Rating (TR)
Evidence Based
courses. It soon became clear that to fulfil this aim within the intended timeframe
of a typical TR course, new technological solutions in regards to training aids would
Training
(EBT) be required.
EBT is a training paradigm Traditionally Airbus trained the behaviour and failures of aircraft systems on flat panel
introduced in ICAO COC 9995 trainers from the Airbus Pilot Transition (APT) trainer and Full-Flight Simulators (FFS).
intended to replace conventional To gain valuable training time in the FFS it was required to offload APT and FFS
recurrent training and checking. sessions. “We wanted to train pilot’s competencies to manage the system and
potential failures throughout the whole course - in an operational realistic environment”,
The aim of an EBT programme is
describes Jean-Charles MAZENQ, one of the lead course designers.
to identify, develop and evaluate
the key competencies required by Instructing in the traditional way (showing and being told by a teacher in a classroom
pilots to operate safely, effectively or watching animated slides like in Computer Based Training) seemed neither efficient
and efficiently in a commercial air enough, nor thoroughly effective. Learning psychologists were consulted and it
transport environment, by became apparent that in the new concept a learning-by-doing concept should be
managing the most relevant applied even in course phases that were so far covered by the traditional methods.
threats and errors, based on
Throughout the course, Airbus developed this concept even further into a learning-by-
evidence collected in operations
discovering principle, demanding an even more proactive role from the trainee
and training.
compared to the learning-by-doing approach. The learning speed and retention rate
has significantly raised using this approach.
Evidence Based Training Implementation The tool enabling this learning paradigm is a new generation training device
Guide, IATA, ICAO, IFALPA 2014 called ACE, used from day one of the type course as the primary training tool
(in the ground phase) and later as a free-play device in the airborne phase.
75#TSAF
31
Airbus Cockpit Experience
ACE
A holistic approach
to training
The deployment of the ACE concept allows Airbus Training
to go the extra mile and to propose a much more advanced
learning concept compared to conventional interactive
Computer Based Training. Learning-by-discovering and
reinforcement thanks to free-play are the key pillars of this
new holistic training approach.
75#TSAF
41
Airbus Cockpit Experience
The Airbus Cockpit Experience
enables you to train wherever
and whenever you wish
75#TSAF
51
Airbus Cockpit Experience
ACE
How does ACE work?
Kate WHELLER, the project leader of the ACE development explains: “It is a
mobile and fully functional A350 cockpit simulator which allows the trainees to
learn the updated A350 interface and functionalities by trying it out at their own “
pace. Interspersed with the simulation, a system guide explains the system
functionality that the pilot is interacting with. This more interactive and adapted
form of learning colours the whole A350 training concept.”
Concretely, the ACE trainer is a 3D virtual and interactive A350 XWB cockpit.
Pilots can perform a self-paced study to acquire knowledge on both systems
and procedures, and apply continuous skill reinforcement over and over again. Customer feedback
They can use the tool as much as necessary, whenever they want, wherever
One year after its introduction the
they want. Trainees repeat and discover details of a system or a function on their
ACE trainer has provoked some
own, using the learning-by-discovering method and are guided to ensure that all
very encouraging customer
the entries are controlled and corrected.
feedback.
“It results in a more holistically trained pilot who has a better understanding
on how to interact with the aircraft” is the impression of an aviation expert “ACE is much more
after using the tool for the first time.3 advanced compared
The same methodology applies to procedure familiarization, with a focus on: to the previous CBT”
• Standard Operating Procedures (SOP), “Very good tool to train
• Flow patterns, with the different
• Abnormal procedures, systems”
• Flight Management System (FMS) functions,
“ACE is remarkable
• Electronic Flight Bag (EFB).
and I would like to
This familiarization results in significant time-saving on other training devices.
continue using it after
The gains on the overall course are significant: the length of the course is two days the course”
shorter than the traditional one but contains more Full Flight Simulator time, more
scenario-based training and a much more solid trained set of competences when This enthusiasm has encouraged
the trainees fly their first mission on line. Airbus to also develop an ACE
trainer for the A330 which will be
Using the ACE leads to better knowledge retention in regards to pilot training, with
available in 2016.
a focus on need-to-understand rather than on the technical details. It provides a
more effective, efficient - and above all - motivating training method adapted to
individual needs.
3. Blog “Leeham News and Comments” June 2015
CONCLUSION
ACE is a learning-by-discovering method for pilot Type Rating training.
Used on tablet devices it is totally portable and may be used whenever and wherever the pilot wishes.
The availability of this self-based-study as well as the motivating, holistic approach to pilot training
reduces the training course by two days while freeing-up Full Flight Simulators for longer, more
optimized sessions.
75#TSAF
61
A350 XWB
composite
repairs
Analysis and repair
of in-service damage
to composite structure
Although you wouldn’t notice from the outside, there
is something very different about the A350 XWB (Extra
Wide Body) compared to most other aircraft: its primary
structure is made of composite. Composite is a short
name used for “Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic” (CFRP),
which has progressively replaced aluminium in aircraft
Article by (left to right) design over the past years.
Not only has this structure improved the aircraft’s
Guillaume FERRER
Repair Embodiment Engineering performance (weight), but also its maintenance and repair
AIRBUS
procedures. It has been designed to fulfil in-service
Guillaume.Ferrer@airbus.com
requirements with benefits such as increased resistance
Cédric CHAMFROY
to accidental ground service impacts, simplified damage
NDT Product Leader
AIRBUS assessment processes and proven repair solutions.
Cedric.Chamfroy@airbus.com
Sébastien S. DUPOUY
A350 Structure Engineering
AIRBUS
Sebastien.S.Dupouy@airbus.com
A350 XWB composite repairs
75#TSAF
71
Robustness by design
The structural robustness of an aircraft is the ability of its structure to sustain
in-service loads through its entire life under realistic environmental conditions,
with no or minimum maintenance actions resulting from common in-service threats.
In this way, structure robustness improves the availability of the aircraft while reducing
the operation and maintenance costs throughout its life.
Robustness is not required by certification. However, Airbus has considered it
(through extensive tests) in the development of its new Carbon Fibre Reinforced
Plastic aircraft: the A350.
GFRP = Glass Fibre Reinforced Plastic
CFRP = Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic
CFRP Sandwich
Titanium alloy
Aluminium alloy
GFRP = Glass Fibre Reinforced PlQausatritcz Fibre Reinforced Plastic
CFRP = Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic
CFRP Sandwich
To ensure the strength and resilience required by the new composite structure,
Titanium alloy
Airbus gathered data from its in-service fleet of mechanical impact scratches
Aluminium alloy
and lightning strikes (sources, locations and dimensions).
Quartz Fibre Reinforced Plastic
Extensive tests and further engineering analyses permitted a conversion
of this data from aircraft metal structures into composite structures and the
corresponding threats and damages data.
These ‘typical’ damages have been implemented in the section of the Allowable
Damage Limit (ADL) of the Structural Repair Manual (SRM).
SRM SRM
Impact tests In-service
Chapter Chapter
(metal fuselage) 7 damage reports 8
Dent depth = f SRM Dent depth SRM SRM Damage SRM
Chapter Chapter FH/FC date Chapter Chapter
(energy) 7 in service 8 8 location 8
Impact energy SRM Impact rate SRM Aircraft SRM
Chapter Chapter Chapter
in-service 8 of occurrence 9 zoning 9
Metal domain
Impact
threat
CFRP domain
SRM
Impact tests
Chapter
(CFRP) 10
SRM SRM SRM
Detectability Chapter Damage tolerance Chapter Dent depth = f Chapter
tests (BVID) 10 criteria for composite 10 (energy) 10
structure sizing
Dent depth = f
(delamination)
SRM
Chapter
Robustness criteria
11
75#TSAF
81
A350 XWB composite repairs
Damage conversion process from metal to CFRP
Calibrated mechanical impact tests on CFRP All types of mechanical impact and lightning
structure are compared with the same tests strikes are analysed.
performed on aluminium structure.
SRM SRM
Impact tests In-service
Chapter Chapter
(metal fuselage) 7 damage reports 8
Dent depth = f SRM Dent depth SRM SRM Damage SRM
Chapter Chapter FH/FC date Chapter Chapter
(energy) 7 in service 8 8 location 8
Impact energy SRM Impact rate SRM Aircraft SRM
Chapter Chapter Chapter
in-service 8 of occurrence 9 zoning 9
Metal domain
Impact
threat
CFRP domain
SRM
Impact tests
Chapter
(CFRP) 10
SRM SRM SRM
Detectability Chapter Damage tolerance Chapter Dent depth = f Chapter
tests (BVID) 10 criteria for composite 10 (energy) 10
structure sizing
Dent depth = f
(delamination)
SRM
Chapter Robustness criteria
11
75#TSAF
91
A350 XWB composite repairs
The ‘Line Tool’ is used for analysis when the visual indication
of an impact exceeds one inch on the composite structure.
The after sale aspect of securing the robustness, allowable damage annealing
or facilitating the maintenance of the A350’s structure containing a high amount
of CFRP, has from the start of its development been considered.
Damage assessment
The objective pursued by Airbus has been to develop a damage assessment process
Used by a
to facilitate aircraft dispatch. Damage to composite materials usually requires the
line mechanic intervention of a qualified Non-Destructive Testing specialist who conducts inspections
using ultrasound. This is no longer necessary on the A350 for two reasons:
to inspect impacts,
• Firstly, damage assessment of routine impacts can be visually assessed. If the visual
the tool gives
indication does not exceed one inch (2.5 cm) diameter, then the aircraft can be
a clear ‘GO’ or dispatched safely because of the A350’s structural robustness. Even in the case
of a lightning strike, an aircraft can be dispatched safely with no further NDT if the
‘NO-GO’result
damage falls within this criterion.
• Secondly, aircraft can be dispatched more quickly because of an Airbus-patented
innovation called the “Line tool”. This tool is used when the visual indication of an
impact exceeds one inch on the composite structure. This ‘GO/NO-GO’ tool can be
used by line mechanics if a significant incident has occurred. After a short functional
test, the inspection is performed using a wheel probe on the composite structure.
The ‘Line Tool’ then displays the result of the inspection: ‘GO’, meaning the
absence of delamination, allowing aircraft dispatch; or ‘NO-GO’, calling for a further
NDT inspection. In addition, this tool can help locate structural elements which are
not visible from the aircraft’s external skin. This tool is provided in a transportable
kit that can be easily stored on the aircraft or may be located at an outstation.
Airbus continues to develop this simplified approach to damage assessment on
composite structures. For instance, an evolution of the line tool will soon enable
operators to automatically obtain the exact size of a delamination, which is expected
to save several hours in the damage assessment process.
75#TSAF
02
A350 XWB composite repairs
Using a full scale model,
Airbus successfully demonstrated
complex repairs, mixing bolted
and bonded techniques
75#TSAF
12
A350 XWB composite repairs
Non-structural repairs
For non-structural (cosmetic) repairs on the A350, High Speed Tape (HST) remains
the most recommended and efficient way to release an aircraft back into service with
the minimum of dispatch disturbance.
An HST repair (600 Flight Cycles) is a temporary repair and a permanent cosmetic
repair that must be performed at the next maintenance check or scheduled stop.
Combining adhesive paste (EA9394 or EC2226), dry carbon fibre and lightning strike
protection (Expanded Copper Foil - ECF), the quick permanent cosmetic repair can be
performed in less than one hour, using a basic skills set, legacy materials and a new
fast curing cycle at 100°C.
Structural repairs (fuselage)
For larger damages, a set of SRM temporary repairs has been developed using
standard aluminium bolted doublers. A dedicated drilling device (CompDrill) has been
certified by Airbus that permits safe drilling from the outside without needing any
internal structure access, and avoiding the need for an NDT inspection after the drilling
operation. Composite dedicated blind bolt fasteners (Composilock) are installed on
the outside of the structure to ease the repair embodiment. Once the temporary grace
period (3 years/3,600 Flight Cycles) is over, the conversion to a permanent repair consists
of a pre-cured CFRP doubler (Airbus part) replacing the metallic temporary doubler.
Tooling and hardware
Dedicated tooling and hardware have been developed to enable safe and accurate
repair. They are detailed in a list available for airlines and Maintenance Repair and
Overhaul (MRO) organizations and include:
• A complete set of consumable materials in a kit format to simplify and ensure
the availability at the customer’s maintenance base location,
• Pre-cured parts (doublers, stiffeners, clips and shims),
• Special drills, fasteners, installation and removal tools needed to perform the repair.
The “COMPDRILL” kit commercialised
by CAPAERO (France) is qualified Example of standard pre-cured repair Composite Material Box providing all flyable and
and referenced in the Structure Repair Manual. part (L-angle) ancillary materials for a Quick Cosmetic Repair
Future developments
Launched in 2014 and currently being certified, a dedicated project aiming to qualify
‘out-of-autoclave bonded repairs’ will enable additional repair scenarios.
Full scale tests have been implemented and tested with success, using a ‘CACRC
(Civil Aviation Composite Repair Committee) prepreg’ material with a 140°C cure cycle.
The target entry-into-service of this alternative process is foreseen at the end of 2016.
CONCLUSION
The A350 has entered into service a year ago, and the solutions developed by Airbus on composite
structure repairs have proven their efficiency. But this is not the end of the story.
Through an A350 dedicated team, Airbus is continuously developing new solutions to anticipate major
damage, develop new repair processes and ease solution embodiment for A350 operators.
75#TSAF
22
Virtual Reality & 3D
for Technical Data
Digital Mock-Up (DMU) has gradually become generalized in aircraft design since
the A380 programme. The investment in virtual 3D modelling has greatly benefitted
downstream phases of the product lifecycle, including Technical Data.
At first glance you could be forgiven for thinking that the
Technical Data team have offered themselves a “gamers
paradise” - in fact the new Virtual Reality rooms created at
Airbus plants in Toulouse and Saint-Nazaire, France, as
well as Hamburg, Germany allow engineers to consult the
DMU with an immersive Virtual Reality experience.
In the darkened rooms virtual 3D models are projected
onto a full scale screen.
Wearing 3D glasses that include a unit which captures
inertia, the perspective of the projected DMU display is
recalculated in real-time, when the user changes position
or tilts their head,
The viewer has the sensation of “entering” the virtual
environment, and they can interact with the digital model,
or even become part of the scene as an avatar artificial
figure with human dimensions.
Known as RHEA (Realistic Human Ergonomic Analysis)
this fascinating and virtually real experience exists to allow
some very real benefits for engineers such as:
• Easier navigation around a virtual 3D aircraft towards
the required information,
• Richer graphics that can display a technically complete
and/or partially realistic view that can be manipulated
by the user to consider different perspectives,
• Animated graphics to show the kinematics of mounting/
dismounting maintenance procedures,
• An improved consistency of information with engineering
design.
Article by (left)
Bertrand SOUQUET
Product Leader 3D Graphics
AIRBUS
Bertrand.Souquet@airbus.com
75#TSAF
32
Virtual Reality & 3D for Technical Data
What is ‘immersive’ Virtual Reality?
Immersive Virtual Reality is a computer immersive Virtual Reality experience. themselves within the 3D environment.
simulated environment that gives the user Although not necessary, one of the most It is this free movement in a virtual world
the feeling of being in that environment popular ways to experience Virtual Reality that recalculates environment perspec-
instead of the one they are actually in. is through a headset that uses stereo- tives and rendering in real-time that gives
A lot of video games have already scopic display to give the impression of users a perception of immersion.
developed the technology to put the user three-dimensional depth in a similar way
Stimulating the senses
into an interactive world, such as the to how each of our eyes combine
The ultimate aim of immersive Virtual
driver seat of a car, in the role of a soldier and interpret visual information. This
Reality is to convince users that they are
on a battle field or even in your own little ability to present an image as 3D is part
inside this make-believe world. To trick
world that you have built yourself. of the immersive experience, it is the
the mind, other sensorial stimulation can
tracking of your movement and recalcul-
Your perception is not altered, you are be used that corresponds with events
ation of the perspective of the projected
simply a spectator overseeing the events happening in the visual environment.
images that gives the user the impression
that are happening in that world. In order For example, in full flight simulators the
of being inside this virtual environment.
for your brain to perceive a virtual visual projections are made increasingly
environment there are a few key factors Immersive Virtual Reality also needs to real by adding hydraulic movement and
that are vital for the creation of an allow users to be able to freely move audio stimulation.
75#TSAF
42
Virtual Reality & 3D for Technical Data
75#TSAF
52
Virtual Reality & 3D for Technical Data
A350 XWB - principal beneficiary of the DMU
Airbus’ latest programme was almost entirely digitally designed and as such has the
most complete 3D technical data. The programme uses thousands of 3D graphics
which complement or replace classical 2D illustrations.
3D products, in VRML format, produced by A350XWB Technical Data are:
• 3D zoning for navigation in AirN@v line maintenance,
• 3D animation for maintenance procedures,
• 3D interactive graphics, in replacement of CGM illustrations for:
- Structural part identification in structural repair IPD,
- Electrical harness installation in IPD ATA91,
- Electrical harness routing and FINs location in AWD ATA91.
• 3D ESN (Electrical Structure Network) for ESN elements available on AirbusWorld:
- CDIS with ESN-ELA (Electrical Load Analysis),
• 3D ARFC Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Chart.
3D zoning 3D animation 3D interactive graphics
This is configured at MSN level The main goal of 3D animation is to These replace classical CGM
(-900, -1000 management) and can provide a quick review of maintenance illustrations, for:
isolate main zone, sub-zones tasks for better understanding.
• Structural part identification
and individual zones.
3D animation explains the movements in Structural Repair IPD,
Data modules linked to zones are: or orientations of components when text
• Electrical harness installation
and illustrations cannot explain the
• Maintenance procedures, in IPD ATA91,
actions sufficiently.
• Maintenance IPD, • Electrical harness routing
3D animation is not intended to replace
and FINs location in AWD ATA91.
• Structural repair IPD, the existing technical data deliverables
(text and 2D illustration) but has to be 3D parts are ‘hot-spotted’ to allow
• AWD ATA91.
considered as a complement to them. interactivity with the parts list.
3D avatar and symbols can be A 3D simplified model of an aircraft
embedded to emphasize important section is displayed in translucent on top
messages, such as “warning”, “caution”, of the 3D parts in order to immediately
“torque”, etc. localize their position in the aircraft.
A vectorial print of the view is possible.
Some graphics such as composite layers
or thickness description are still delivered
in classical 2D illustration (CGM format).
AWD - Aircraft Wiring Diagram
CDIS - located on AirbusWorld
CGM - Computer Graphics Metafile
FIN - Functional Item Number
IPD/IPC - Illustrated Parts Data/Catalogue
VRML - Virtual Reality Markup Language
75#TSAF
62
Virtual Reality & 3D for Technical Data
A320neo use case
The advent of the neo (new engine option) has allowed the
use of 3D VR in the A320 programme for design changes
to the wing, engine, nacelle, pylon, etc.
In the scope of the aircraft’s structure, maintenance, pro-
gramme and definition, information was needed in order to:
1 Validate accessibility related to some of the structure
maintenance tasks (corrosion and fatigue)
For example:
- Inspection of the engine pylon spigot receptacle without
having to remove the pylon,
- Removal of impractical access from maintenance tasks.
2 Challenge heavy maintenance tasks
(e.g. engine removal)
For example:
- Is it mandatory to remove the engine in order to perform
the fatigue Rototest* inspection of the lateral panels?
The information supplied by 3D VR calculation allowed the
design team to:
VR calculations found that Polar End Caps could be accessed and replaced
- Define the type of inspection (e.g. visual, detailed, special
without removing the potable water tanks from the aircraft.
detailed),
- Define the access required to perform structure mainten-
ance tasks,
A380 use case
- Define the task threshold and intervals (only for corrosion,
A380 aircraft have experienced leaking O-rings on the Polar
fatigue calculations which are performed by the Stress
End Cap (PEC) of potable water tanks. VR was used to
office).
review the AMM tasks for their replacement.
The task data was communicated to Aircraft Maintenance
Most Polar End Caps are accessible from maintenance
Manual (AMM) team members who are responsible for writing
panels or decompression panels without the need to remove
inspection procedures.
the tank.
However, confirmation was needed that the O-rings could be
replaced without having to remove the tanks located behind
the Lower Deck Cabin Crew Rest Compartment, which has
particularly confined access.
VR established that the optimal way of replacing the O-rings
was to slightly move the tanks from their initial position to
provide access to the leaking outboard PECs. It was also
calculated that two working shifts with two mechanics would
be necessary for this task.
This access check was based on assumptions that the
removal is performed by a person of small stature and that
a specially designed tool is available.
A navigation remote control and a representation of a human hand,
allow users to project themselves into the Digital Mock-Up and act
on the models to check for ease of access.
* Rototest: inspection tool with a rotative probe
for testing holes with the eddy current method.
75#TSAF
72
Virtual Reality & 3D for Technical Data
ARFC 3D (Aircraft Rescue and Fire Fighting Chart)
A recent example of the use of 3D
is the A350 ARFC 3D (Aircraft Rescue
and Fire Fighting Chart) published
on AirbusWorld.
The purpose of the ARFC is to provide
rescue personnel with relevant
information on the aircraft so that
firefighters can evacuate passengers
and crew as quickly as possible.
This complements the ARFC, which
is currently in poster form and as 2D
illustrations incorporated in the Aircraft
Characteristics manual.
CONCLUSION
One of the intentions of Technical Data is to provide efficient visualization of textual information.
Design data from the Digital Mock-Up, can now be converted into 3D interactive graphics that offer
capabilities for a richer, navigable experience that simplifies the understanding of technical content.
Augmented Reality
75#TSAF
82
Augmented
Reality
in Airbus
New opportunities to assist
aircraft maintenance and engineering
Augmented Reality (AR) is a field of technologies that
improves a user’s situational awareness by bringing them
relevant contextual digital information in a suitable format
and time frame. Unlike Virtual Reality, which is entirely
based on a simulated world, AR roots are the real world,
which is then mixed with a numerical world.
Article by (left to right) AR can result in time, cost and energy savings; for example, natural, dynamic,
step-by-step visualisations of complex processes can lead to fewer errors and better
Siegfried SOLDANI task comprehension and execution. For these reasons, Airbus is considering the
Research Engineer deployment of AR systems that are finely-tuned to specific identified uses and which
AIRBUS are compliant with aeronautical industry requirements.
Siegfried.Soldani@airbus.com
Several Airbus Group teams are working together to design, assess and deploy
Sebastien DEDIEU
concrete AR solutions and support various internal initiatives. In the research entity
Research Project Manager
Airbus Group Innovations (AGI), a dedicated team is exploring uses and suitable
AIRBUS
algorithms. They are working closely with ProtoSpace, the Airbus project catalyzer
Sebastien.Dedieu@airbus.com
environment inspired by Fablabs, which is deeply involved in that domain and focused
on both technology assessment and rapid knowledge acquisition. Studies for Airbus
Pascale HUGUES
Customer Services are conducted by the @MOST Research & Technology project,
Research Engineer
converting the experiences into solutions that pave the way for implementation with
AIRBUS GROUP INNOVATIONS
the business. Following the successful deployment of AR technologies in Airbus
Pascale.Hugues@airbus.com
manufacturing, other domains have become candidates: Airbus Customer Services
is among them.
Alexandre GODIN
ProtoSpace Technologist
AIRBUS
Alexandre.Godin@airbus.com
Augmented Reality
Definition
The term “Augmented Reality” was introduced by an aeronautic engineer in early 1990s.
The foundations of this technology field started in the 1960s with the elaboration of the first rudimentary,
experimental see-through displays, superimposing digital images on top of the user’s field of view.
Nevertheless, although AR is often limited to a visual context, it is in fact much more than that, as it
includes all other human perception modalities of hearing, touch, smell, etc.
The definition given by Sébastien BOTTECHIA in 2010 takes into account this
multidimensional aspect of AR: “It is a combination between the physical space
and the numerical space in a semantically linked context”.
In other words, it is a system that enriches users’ natural perception of their surroundings by overlaying
digital information in an suitable format that is linked to it, in real time. This process aims at “augmenting”
the limited human perception through access to relevant numerical data, which is not naturally available in the
environment: the term “Augmented Perception” would be actually more appropriate to designate this domain.
Architecture
Major components of an AR system are:
• Sensors collecting data about the near user environment > context recognition,
• Means to compute input and output data > data integration,
• Interfaces to bring the information to the user and eventually enable interaction > data communication.
A simple example of an AR system is the radar-assisted parking technology that is fitted into the rear
bumpers of some cars. The driver’s natural field of view behind the car is limited by the structure.
As a consequence, some parking manoeuvres are not easy. So, some car manufacturers have put
sensors in the rear bumpers to collect distance data in real-time. This data is then processed, integrated and
translated into exploitable information, and communicated via different interfaces (sound, display, vibration):
drivers know the distance to impact through their augmented perception of the current situation.
Thanks to this system, parking becomes easier, quicker and safer.
75#TSAF
92
AR shows the position of the radar
in the A350 radome
Augmented Reality
Augmented Reality in aeronautics
AR has been known in aeronautics from the 1970s with the development of Head Up
Displays (HUD - see FAST 56). It is a system enabling pilots to access relevant
information in their direct line of sight when looking through the windshield. Using it,
they can pilot the aircraft without looking away from their focal point (runway, other
aircraft, etc.), and still collect external environment information. Developed for air-to-air
combat operations in which pilots had trouble switching between internal instrument
and external view, such systems have also proved beneficial for commercial operations.
Based on progress in the digital industry democratizing high technology (such as,
increases in processing capability, ever-shrinking hardware, more efficient batteries,
improvements in the ratios of cost-performance in optics and electronics components,
etc.), new ways to design and use AR systems can now be considered. For example,
the automotive industry is currently trying to develop HUD systems that fit industry
constraints (cost, layout, etc.).
Such technologies can now be applied at the scale of individuals in aeronautics such
as workers on the Final Assembly Line, engineers, mechanics or pilots.
This industry, which requires extensive know-how and relies on man-based process-
es, is conducive to deploying AR technologies. Indeed, systems are increasingly
complex while design and training phases are becoming shorter and shorter.
Easier, faster and safer operations, that capitalize on available big data and potentially
lead to time, cost and energy savings are key differentiators in this very competitive
environment.
AR is one of several solutions that can open new perspectives especially for the manu-
facturing and maintenance of a product which requires the highest quality standards
possible. Mobile, light and inexpensive technologies will enable people to connect and
access relevant ‘big data’, accessing relevant digital content on-demand to perform
their daily jobs.
75#TSAF
03
Head-Up Displays allow pilots to access
relevant information in their direct line of sight
Augmented Reality
Design criteria: the example of Google Glass®
AR systems are by definition intrusive, impacting the user’s as social and human factors issues (privacy, self-image,
perception of the environment. A fine balance needs to be distraction, limited autonomy, etc.). Google® is no longer
found between the various design criteria: technology, use and targeting a public release for Glass®, but the company now
user, that allow the benefits of AR without potential negative appears to be developing for specific professional uses.
effects (disturbing the user’s environment, too complex, etc.).
Indeed, professionals are very interested in the benefits that
Each time one of the criteria changes, the global balance has
this type of technology can bring because the industrial
to be reconsidered. This explains why there are currently no
environment makes it a relevant candidate for initial deploy-
standard mass-market AR solutions available that are powerful
ment. Tasks and processes can be precisely studied and
and versatile enough to satisfy the varying needs and wishes
controlled, and users can be specifically chosen and trained,
of all users at the same time.
overcoming the issue of variability. Microsoft® were quick to
The best recent example illustrating this complexity is the understand this when developing its new product HoloLens®,
programme “Glass®”, launched in test phase in April 2012 which introduces a new generation of mobile smart devices
by Google®. Google® designed a semi-autonomous system and opens new perspectives for applications compared to
(coupled with a smartphone or computer) embedded in a previous solutions (thanks to the integration of new technolo-
single arm of a pair of glasses. It includes sensors (camera, gies and its intrinsic ergonomic qualities).
Inertial Measurement Unit), computing means (processing
All the various devices, technologies, algorithms and uses are
units, storage, and battery) and an interface (a transparent
constantly evaluated in Airbus: first in Airbus Group Innovations
screen adding digital images on the top right of the user’s
and ProtoSpace centres to learn and acquire the technological
field of view).
experience required for potential future deployment, then in
Google Glass® was presented as the future mass-market AR close collaboration with the various Airbus business experts.
connected mobile electronic device for everyday use. In 2015, Specific developments are then undertaken and the teams
after an initial positive welcome from the public and several iterate towards an industrial solution.
test phases, the Google Glass® project was not launched as
a general release product, having been paralysed by the gap
between user expectations and technology capabilities as well
75#TSAF
13
Comparitive analysis: Google Glass® vs Microsoft HoloLens®
Google’s Glass® (2012 edition) is a semi-autonomous system Microsoft® refers to HoloLens® as the first untethered holo-
(coupled with a smartphone or computer) embedded into a graphic computer. It is a fully autonomous augmented reality
single arm of a pair of glasses, running the mobile Android OS. headgear, that hosts computer-class components and runs
Its hardware architecture is limited by its minimalist design, Windows 10 (an AR specific version). Easily settable, well
which nevertheless allows ergonomic qualities. It includes a full balanced and quickly removable, Hololens® integrates
pack of sensors (camera, Inertial Measurement Unit), comput- advanced sensors allowing very precise tracking of the user
ing means (processing units, storage, and battery) and a in their surroundings. Two high definition transparent screens
transparent screen displaying digital images on the top right of in front of each eye, display digital images in the user’s natural
the user’s field of view (monocular – no 3D). Interactions are field of view, in 3D, overlaid on top of the “real” world.
based on a small touch area on the side of the glass. The advanced integrated tracking and scanning capabilities,
The limited capacities of the device and the screen interface very powerful architecture, binaural sound system and display
type make it very well adapted for the display of simple performances enable digital artefacts to be seamlessly
as-and-when needed notifications (pop up mode). It is not integrated with the environment, to interact with it and be
adapted to display complex information and is not ideal for perceived by the user almost as non-digital. Interactions are
prolonged use (forces users to focus unnaturally with one eye based on natural gestures (head, hand) and voice.
to the top right).
Integrates digital objects, that are perceived and behave
Integrates digital notification to the user’s perception of almost as if they were real in the user’s perception of the
the environment. environment.
Augmented Reality
Users and uses
One of the latest Airbus successes comes from integrated teams from AGI and
manufacturing centres who developed and deployed MiRA, an AR based application.
This application for the inspection of Airbus aircraft elements superimposes a corre-
sponding digital version onto the real installation (thanks to a camera based calibration
process). MiRA, deployed since 2011 and commercialized outside of Airbus by Testia
(an Airbus subsidiary), is used by 600 engineers to ease inspection tasks at Airbus
plants. Used with tablets, the application will soon be available in a projection version
for installation support, giving access to step-by-step instructions directly projected
onto real parts.
Glasses-based AR applications which significantly reduce task lead time are also to be
deployed for seat installation setup. This time reduction greatly improves working
conditions for technicians that have to kneel to prepare floor brackets. The glasses
automatically provide them with real-time distance information thanks to a connection
with a laser that is synchronized with the aircraft plan. This also allows them to perform
their operation hands-free.
Increasing aircraft availability
The large increases in passenger traffic over recent years makes aircraft availability
one of the major challenges faced by airlines. Each minute the aircraft is on the ground
is considered counter-productive: reducing aircraft immobilization during maintenance
activities has become a high priority for airlines.
To help airlines achieve these objectives, Airbus is prototyping AR systems to provide
maintenance operators with mobile and real-time functionalities that simplify and
accelerate their activities. One particular time-saving functionality is the capability to
guide operators through the various aircraft zones, automatically optimizing their path.
No time is lost searching for the right aircraft area or access, and users are guided
straight to the next step of the process, depending on their position.
Another tested functionality aims at precisely locating and visualizing components that
are not directly visible (under various layers of structures or systems). Given the
thousands of components in an aircraft, locating and identifying the correct one to
test, then fixing or replacing, are time-consuming recurrent issues for maintenance
operators.
Another AR function currently being investigated is to superimpose digital information
of the correct process needed to perform a task, directly onto the concerned part and
based on existing documentation (AMM, IPC etc.). This visual technical demonstration
could also be explained with a voiceover that the user can fully control.
Added to the benefits of a guided, hands-free operation, the operator would also be
able to give input and provide notes on the task performed directly digitalized and
stored through the AR interface.
This has led to the exploration of systems that enable operators in the field to reach
any expert in the world, show them the situation in detail and get their informed
recommendations. This is a reassuring AR solution that will drastically improve remote
operations and many more use cases are currently being considered in various areas.
75#TSAF
23
See instructions on page 2
to see the cover of this magazine
‘augmented’ by a 3D A380 aircraft.
Airbus teams are testing and prototyping
various types of AR systems taking into account
the end-user and its environment.
AMM - Aircraft Maintenance Manual
IPC - Illustrated Parts Catalogue
Augmented Reality
75#TSAF
33
CONCLUSION
Today, Augmented Reality technologies are at a decisive point where progresses are increasingly meeting user
expectations within the framework of the aeronautical industry. This progress corresponds with the developing
capacities of current technology.
Airbus’ permanently growing experience in this field, based on robust research by Airbus Group Innovations
and practical knowledge acquisition by ProtoSpace, has resulted in increased benefits for business testing,
adapting and applying preliminary solutions. Simulations show that the added value of AR deployment
increases compared to Non-Recurring Costs (NRC).
The use of AR, which will significantly impact ways of working, is not only interesting for Airbus, but for
airlines, Maintenance Repair and Overhaul (MRO) organizations and other new maintenance services too.
Conscious of this pool of improvement, Airbus continues to push the boundaries of technology via discus-
sion, test and collaboration with the world’s best AR players. The opportunities to increase the efficiency of
maintenance are encouraged by previous successes such as the MiRA project or the Final Assembly Line
seat installation concept.
Nevertheless, the maturity of current development has to be proved in an operational context. This is why
Airbus, through its ProtoSpace centres that link between research, technology, business across the divisions,
as well as the various industrial internal and external stakeholders around the world, is:
• Preparing a transition phase to a new philosophy through internal rapid experience acquisition,
• Building a global vision instead of case-by-case successes, spreading its know-how,
• Taking the human factor and operational context into serious consideration during development.
The comprehensive command of Augmented Reality and the rapid integration of this knowledge into
deployable and scalable solutions, will enable Airbus to find new solutions to facilitate and accelerate airlines’
operational activities.
S B
75#TSAF
43
Configuration
management
Article by
Jean-Philippe JACQ
Head of Standard Service
Bulletins Programme
AIRBUS
Jean-Philippe.Jacq@airbus.com
75#TSAF
53
SB configuration management
7891 8891 9891 0991 1991 2991 3991 4991 5991 6991 7991 8991 9991 0002 1002 2002 3002 4002 5002 6002 7002 8002 9002 0102 1102 2102 3102
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
0
ytivitceffe
ni
NSM
tfarcria
fo
rebmuN
The efficient way to simplify Service Bulletins
It took 15 years working in the aeronautical Customer Services environment,
dealing with Service Bulletins every day, before I performed an internet search
to discover more about this technical publication which is well-known for any
aircraft engineer.
My attention was immediately drawn by the first “hit” displaying a fascinating
question: “What is a service bulletin in aviation”. The answer was a surprisingly
uninformative: “A Service Bulletin in aviation is the same as a Service Bulletin in
any other field”.
The aviation industry, in both civil and military sectors, produces thousands of
Service Bulletins every year, to improve the original aircraft design, correct
issues in service or introduce customer originating aircraft conversions by
modification. Service Bulletins can be found on the internet for almost every
conceivable product we buy (cars, electrical appliances, pinball machines...).
All Service Bulletins share a certain degree of commonality with those in
aviation - they give detailed instructions and provide illustrations for ease of
understanding.
Airbus Service Bulletin effectivity
Airbus released the first Service Bulletin in 1974, only a few months after delivery
of the first A300, to improve engine vibration detection circuits. Since this first
publication, 15,000 Service Bulletins applicable to a total of almost 7 million
individual aircraft Manufacturer Serial Number (MSN) items have been produced.
In the graph below, each dot is a Service Bulletin dispatched since 1997, with
the number of aircraft MSN covered in effectivity on the vertical axis. Service
Bulletins are not necessarily applicable for the whole in-service fleet; however
clouds of dots clearly follow the growth of the fleet for each aircraft family.
Service Bulletin effectivity
A300/A310 A320 Family A330/A340 A380
Service Bulletins in aviation can be described in different ways depending on the
user’s views. They are primarily technical, detailing inspections or changes to the
aircraft type design through a set of approved instructions. Service Bulletins also
describe the benefits and the repercussions associated with the implementation action
and provide commercial, operational and contextual data for decision makers. Last
but not least, accomplished Service Bulletins are reported by operators, guaranteeing
the continuity of in-service aircraft configuration management.
SB configuration management
What is configuration management applied to Airbus Service Bulletins?
While a novice will depict an aircraft as a cylinder fitted with wings and engines, an
aircraft configuration manager will see an individual aircraft as a large stack of modifica-
tion numbers characterizing its exact technical definition status. Modification stacking is
indeed the fundamental principle in configuration management.
Each aircraft evolution by modification stacks on top of the previous modification.
The last post-modification status serves as the pre-modification basis for the next
modification of the stack.
When an aircraft is delivered, Airbus provides operators with an aircraft inspection report
(AIR) of the recorded modification stack for the given aircraft. This list of modifications is
made up from the initial set of modifications necessary to achieve aircraft Type Certification
and of additional standard modifications introduced as product improvement through
later evolutions of the aircraft standard. Optional modifications chosen by the customer
can also be added as the result of the aircraft customization process.
Service Bulletins cover the embodiment of retrofitable modifications after aircraft delivery.
Hence, Service Bulletins follow the same “modification stack-up” principle and link up
with the previous Service Bulletin of the stack. The illustration below shows this principle.
Aircraft modification stack-up management principle
Aircraft deliveries
Evolutions of the modification stack are recorded at Airbus for each in-service aircraft
based upon operator reporting Service Bulletin embodiment status. This data is the
primary source for customization of technical and operational documentation. It also
defines the pre-modification status for each aircraft MSN in the effectivity of a later
Airbus Service Bulletin.
kcats
noitacifidoM
Mod.α and β are proposed for embodiment AFTER AIRCRAFT DELIVERY
Customer request
in-service via Service Bulletin α and β
Upgrade Service Bulletin β
valid for MSN 0001...0005
Airbus decision
Standard Service Bulletin α
valid for MSN 0001...0003
BEFORE AIRCRAFT DELIVERY
SB α SB α SB α MMoOdD. βα Customer originated
embodied embodiment rejected vviiaa Mod. β optional modification
planned SSBB βα
Mod. α MMoOdD. αα Standard
via vviiaa Mod. α Mod. α Mod. α Mod. α Mod. α m on o M dif S ic N a 0 ti 0 on 04
SB α SSBB αα
onwards
TC TC TC TC TC TC TC TC Initial
modification
∑Mod. ∑Mod. ∑Mod. ∑Mod. ∑Mod. ∑Mod. ∑Mod. ∑Mod.
stack as part of
Type Certificate
MSN MSN MSN MSN MSN MSN MSN MSN
0001 0002 0003 0004 0005 0006 0007 0008
75#TSAF
63
SB configuration management
Why configuration management improves Airbus Service Bulletins?
Aircraft MSN with the same modification stack, are managed in a similar way, allowing cluster
groups of MSNs under specific Service Bulletin configurations. Configuring Service Bulletins results
in a higher level of technical accuracy by defining pre and post-modification status and enabling
appropriate detailed instructions for a given configuration.
With configuration management, the content of Airbus Service Bulletins is not necessarily propor-
tional to the amount of aircraft MSN included in the effectivity of the document. As the effectivity of
Service Bulletins generally covers a large range of aircraft MSN, configuration management is used
to simplify the content by grouping aircraft MSN in a configuration* where the technical solution is
identical and the same technical instructions can be followed.
Configuration management avoids duplication of technical content and significantly reduces the
length of Service Bulletins.
Producing service instructions for airline mechanics is a time-consuming exercise, especially for
complex Service Bulletins. To save airline resources a solution known as SB+ was developed to
reduce the time required to process and access Service Bulletin data (for more details contact:
sbplus.services@airbus.com):
- Service Bulletins can be customised by configuration management. For example, by MSN
or a set of MSN which use the standard filtering function in AirN@v Engineering.
The benefits in terms of reduction of content size can be significant as shown in the example below.
SB envelope
870 pages
SB envelope
-70%
600 pages in size
-60% -90%
in size in size
SB by configuration
SB envelope
270 pages
SB by configuration SB by configuration
120 pages
50 pages 50 pages
80 MH 25 MH 270 MH
3 configurations 9 configurations 5 configurations
In both cases the reduction of the Service Bulletin content is achieved by using appropriate
functions to display the applicable work instructions for one or several of the configurations
defined in the Service Bulletin.
* other criteria exist such as aircraft type, weight & balance, etc.
CONCLUSION
Configuration management based on the ‘Modification stack up’ principle is a powerful tool deployed by
Airbus to manage and record the detailed technical definition of each aircraft MSN, both before and after
its delivery. Airbus Service Bulletins fully use this principle to ensure the most complete and accurate
technical solutions are provided to customers. With configuration management, Service Bulletins are
simpler and easier to understand allowing airlines’ engineering to save resources and Airbus to offer more
services to operators.
75#TSAF
73
FAST
from the PAST
There wouldn’t be any future without the experience of the past.
egatireH
etaroproC
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
sotohP
Not so long ago the time taken for turn-around was
not calculated into the profitability of airline operations
and the ground service was... rudimentary.
Stewards assisted their glamorous passengers as
they clambered up the rungs of a ladder to board
their aircraft, while engineers refuelled by rolling in
barrels on rails and filling by hand-pump.
Destination and take-off times were carefully chalked
onto a departure board attached to the aircraft.
Today, aircraft carry a hundred times more passen-
gers, and cost infinitely more. Every second on the
ground is a second that the aircraft is not paying for
itself. Which is why each ground operation is followed
and optimized to minimize the time on-ground and
maximize passenger comfort (see article on page 4).
75#TSAF
83
We’ve got it covered
Around the clock, around the world,
Airbus has more than 240 field representatives
based in over 110 cities
WORLDWIDE TECHNICAL, MATERIAL & LOGISTICS TRAINING CENTRES
Airbus Training Centre
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 1980 Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC)
Toulouse, France
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 1818 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3333
Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500
USA/CANADA Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094
airtac@airbus.com
Tel: +1 703 834 3484 Airbus Maintenance
Spares AOG/Work Stoppage
Fax: +1 703 834 3464 Training Centre
• Outside the Americas:
Hamburg, Germany
CHINA Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8588
aog.spares@airbus.com
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162
• In the Americas: Airbus Training Centre Americas
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Tel: +1 70 3729 9000 Miami, Florida - U.S.A.
ADMINISTRATION Fax: +1 70 3729 4373 Tel: +1 305 871 3656
aog.na@airbus.com Fax: +1 305 871 4649
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936,
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964 Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas: Airbus Training Centre Beijing
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002 Tel: + 86 10 8047 5341
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
Airbus Training Centre Bangalore
ifd.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +91 9880065511
Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas: Airbus Training Centre Delhi
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003 Tel: +91 9880065511
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
Airbus Middle East FZE Dubai
hmv.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +971 4 602 78 62
Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
Training by Airbus Jakarta
Please contact your dedicated customer spares
Jerome.Dartus@airbus.com
account representative csr.na@airbus.com
Airbus Asia Training Centre Singapore
Yueyu.He@airbus.com
75#TSAF
93
How can I fly more
passengers to the
most popular airports
at peak times?
Fly the A380. The world’s most
spacious commercial aircraft.
Capture more high-yield traffic
on the busiest routes and offer
the highest passenger appeal
with 18+ inch seats in economy.
Airbus is the answer.
airbus.com
© AIRBUS, 2015. All rights reserved. Airbus, its logo and the product names are registered trademarks.
12186_AIR_QA_NYC_Master_297x210_1.0.indd 1 17/11/2015 12:19
