Airbus technical magazine
April 2019
#63
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Already have the FAST app?
Now get the latest news for customers
via Airbus’ Newsfeed app.
FAST
FAST and Newsfeed apps
are downloadable to your preferred device
9102
-
36#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
FAST magazine articles, primarily dedicated to Airbus
commercial aircraft customers, are written by our
Already have the FAST app? #63
technical experts and focus on what is informative,
interesting and useful to operators.
Now get the latest news for customers
Learn about innovations and evolutions to Airbus
FA S T
aircraft, as well as best practices to help optimise
via Airbus’ Newsfeed app.
fleet performance. And see where Airbus is working,
sometimes with key players in the industry, to
continue to support customers and prepare the future.
Although the printed copy remains popular, you may
prefer to switch to the app version of FAST, enabling
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
you to share and comment. Any changes in preference
can be sent to your field service or to the editor.
Chief Editor: Deborah Buckler And for short news updates for customers, make
sure you have the Newsfeed by Airbus app.
Writing support: Parkinson Stephens Editorial, Chris Bockman
This consolidates key news in one place, with content
Design: Pont Bleu
from across Airbus, streamlining and aligning
Cover image: A220 interior, Frederick Lancelot communication in response to your requests
(see opposite).
Printer: Amadio
Authorisation for reprinting FAST magazine articles:
fast.magazine@airbus.com
Deborah BUCKLER
FAST magazine availability:
Chief Editor
On the FAST app (see QR code opposite page)
Airbus website:
www.aircraft.airbus.com/support-services/publications/
ISSN 1293-5476
Photo copyright Airbus. Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Corporate Heritage,
Aerotheque, Master Films, Hervé Gousset, Philippe Masclet, Benjamin Mouchet, Pierre-Jean Argaud,
Alexandre Doumanjou, Frederick Lancelot, Sylvain Ramadier, Pascal Pigeyre, Anthony Pecchi The cabin waste mountain 04
Managing the rising quantities and costs
Targeting the perfect fit 08
Reducing GSE-induced damage
© AIRBUS 2019 All rights reserved. Proprietary document
to aircraft
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified Pilot training 14
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
Meeting the need for competent,
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive qualified pilots
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements Flying the A220 20
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Design features and airline feedback
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains, Data management 30
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals What big data is doing for aviation
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A220, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, FANS C 34
A330, A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
FAST Latest technology
for air traffic management
FAST from the past 38
FAST and Newsfeed apps
This brochure is printed on paper produced in factories that are accredited EMAS and certified
ISO 9001-14001, PEFC and FSC CoC. Around the clock, 39
are downloadable to your preferred device It is produced using pulp that has been whitened without either chlorine or acid. The paper is
entirely recyclable and is produced from trees grown in sustainable forest resources. around the world
The printing inks use organic pigments or minerals. There is no use of basic dyes or dangerous
metals from the cadmium, lead, mercury or hexavalent chromium group. Field representatives and training centres
9102
-
36#TSAF
40
The cabin waste
mountain
Managing the rising
quantities and costs
Article by
Axel BECKER
Trend Research manager
AIRBUS
axel.becker@airbus.com
Matthias REISS
Environmental Champion,
Cabin and Cargo
AIRBUS
matthias.reiss@airbus.com
For most passengers, when the cabin crew starts going through the aisle
collecting the rubbish from seat trays, it’s usually a subconscious signal
that landing is not too far off, especially on a short-haul flight.
On a long-distance trip, passengers are just happy to fold up their tray.
But what about the waste itself that is generated on a flight? The statistics
are incredible. According to IATA 5.2 million tonnes of cabin waste were
created in 2016 and that number is expected to double by 2030.
9102
-
36#TSAF
50
The cabin waste mountain
The cabin waste
Why is cabin waste on the increase?
There are several factors to explain this rise. First of all, we are consuming more on
flights. We may be bringing fewer newspapers on board as we download from tablets
mountain and mobile phones, but we drink far more from plastic cups and glasses, especially
on short-haul flights. The food that we purchase on board is also more elaborately
prepared with fancier wrapping. As more and more airlines charge for food services,
passengers are increasingly bringing food on board with them that they purchased at
the airport. According to IATA, 25% of meals on long-haul flights are not even eaten
and are thrown away, ending up in landfills.
Dealing with waste today
Of course, with air traffic doubling every 15 years and a rapidly growing middle-class
taking to the skies, especially in India and Asia, the waste in the cabin will inevitably
continue to expand. The growing « airborne waste mountain » will become more and
more of a challenge for the airline industry as it has to find new ways of disposing it.
Currently, waste is collected but rarely sorted by cabin crew. There is little concrete
data on how much waste is currently recycled, but nearly all of it is handed over to
airports that then send it to landfills or incinerators.
Overall, the cost of handling cabin waste is estimated at around 500 million US dollars
per year according to IATA and that figure could rise substantially in the coming years.
Airports are increasingly charging airlines more to handle airlines’ un-recycled waste.
Some airlines actually find it cheaper, despite the extra weight, to hold on to their trash
for the return flight, then unload it back at their hub where they may have lower
unloading fees.
5 million tonnes
of waste by 2030
Handling waste tomorrow
Airlines clearly understand the challenges ahead when it comes to handling cabin
waste. In recent feedback to Airbus, some airlines rated the issue of recycling as of
very high or rather high importance today. However, the same airlines also said that
in 5 years’ time, the issue will soar amongst their list of priorities.
A combination of higher costs, possible new regulations in the future on recycling and
a greater emphasis on aviation’s impact on the environment is encouraging the aircraft
manufacturers, airlines, suppliers and regulators to find new solutions to better treat
waste in the future. The European Union is currently co-financing studies within the
industry to tackle the issue.
Jon Godson, assistant director of IATA, specifically addresses the issue of aviation
environment and better environmental practices in the cabin. Among the ideas it is
promoting, is the reduction of over-ordering by catering companies, since so much
food brought on board is not touched. Another idea is to offer vouchers to passengers
to eat in the terminal before they board, particularly as regulations allow waste which
is collected on the ground in airports to be recycled more easily. IATA also suggests
the use of dedicated recycling carts.
9102
-
36#TSAF
60
The cabin waste mountain
Recycling on-board, quickly and easily
One potential solution, the “Retrolley”, is already being rolled out and tested with
several airlines on both long and short-haul flights in Europe and the Middle East.
The Retrolley in its original form was designed by Brazilian aviation students in an
Airbus ideas competition*. Airbus worked on maturing the design with Iacobucci
Aerospace, an Italian manufacturer with over 40 years of expertise making cabin
products including coffee machines, trash compactors and trolleys.
The Retrolley is a totally re-designed trolley to collect trash and separate it in « real-
time » as it is collected by the cabin crew. There are several different compartments,
which can be customized according to the specific airline needs. One possible
configuration is to have one container for cups that can be stacked up, one for liquids,
one to hold recyclable paper and plastics and a fourth compartment for trash that
cannot be recycled easily. They have been configured for flexibility, as Lucio Iacobucci,
CEO, explains: ‘The Retrolley is a very simple system because it can be used
on different flights. Cabin service for short flights may have more liquids to collect,
and so we can configure the Retrolley with between 1 and 3 bins specifically for cups
and liquids. However, on longer flights there could be bigger containers for a variety
of waste. The bottom line is that there is no standard concept. Each airline has its
approach and needs and the Retrolley can adapt to these requirements.’
Jon Godson from IATA also sees the trolley as a way forward in the campaign against
waste because it addresses health inspectors’ concerns about the need to clearly
separate recyclable rubbish from other waste: ‘Retrolley is a great step forward for
cabin waste recycling and should provide assurance to regulators that we can keep
recyclables free from any bio-security risks.’
Airbus is convinced that the Retrolley will be welcomed by the industry and will
contribute to a more sustainable future because it fulfils key requirements for airlines:
this trolley can be integrated into any galley without modifications and with a simple,
non-electrical and lightweight design.
Retrolley adapts
to airlines’ needs
CONCLUSION
Cabin waste is on the increase, as are the associated costs of managing it. Challenges include
the sheer volume of waste, but also the time and space constraints of the cabin crew and the
environmental awareness requiring better recycling of waste.
The Retrolley is one option, expected to be in service by end of 2019. The trolley enables direct
sorting by cabin crew as they pass through the cabin. Already, 40 airlines worldwide have expressed
interest in acquiring the trolley which is planned to be made available across the whole Airbus fleet.
Trials began with a major European carrier in November 2018. The Retrolley is going through
the certification process with the European Technical Standard Order (ETSO) under the authority
of EASA. Meanwhile, the supplier is working closely with catering companies.
9102
-
36#TSAF
70
The cabin waste mountain
*Airbus Fly Your Ideas competition
behind Retrolley concept
The Retrolley was designed by 5 students from Sao
Paolo University. They participated in the Fly Your
Ideas competition that Airbus runs in partnership
with UNESCO to encourage students to come up
with new innovations to transform the world of
aviation. The students worked alongside Airbus
engineers to help turn their idea into a reality.
Nicolas Jourdan, an Airbus cabin innovation
manager, saw the students’ idea and thought:
“Wow - this is so clear we should do something with
this. We can make it fly, especially as it combines
innovation and environmental goals together.”
The Retrolley won the 2017 Crystal Cabin Award
at the Aircraft Interiors Expo.
www.airbus-fyi.com
There is no standard fit for Retrolley, it can be fitted with between 1 and 3
bins for cups and liquids. However, on longer flights there could be
bigger containers for a variety of waste
Get the FAST app
Scan the QR code or search
‘Airbus FAST’ on your app store
9102
-
36#TSAF
80
Targeting
the perfect fit
Reducing GSE-induced damage to aircraft
Damage to aircraft doors and airframe sections caused by
Article by
misaligned ground equipment costs the aviation industry
Diego ALONSO TABARES
billions of dollars every year. There is now a solution which
Airport operations
significantly lowers damage risk, developed through a AIRBUS
diego.alonso-tabares@airbus.com
collaborative approach involving airlines, ground equipment
manufacturers, ground handlers and service providers.
The proposal links reflective adhesive aircraft markings with
camera-guided automated ground equipment to perform
accurate docking. It is currently undergoing airline trials
with a view to being adopted as an industry standard.
Targeting the perfect fit
9102
-
36#TSAF
90
Targeting
All commercial aircraft experience ramp damage at some point during their in-service
life. Airport equipment misalignment and distance misjudgement are a major issue
for airlines, airport operators and ground handlers and are often compounded by time
pressure and insufficient manpower on the apron.
the perfect fit
2,500 1.0
0,9
2,000 0,8
0,7
1,500 0,6
0,5
0,4
1,000
0,3
0,2
500
0,1
0
0
Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1
2013 2013-2014 2014 2014-2015 2015 2015-2016 2016 2016-2017 2017 2017-2018
Minor Severity Reports
Low Severity Reports
Moderate Severity Reports
High Severity Reports
Damage Rate per 1,000 sectors
Damage Rate excluding minor severity per 1,000 sectors
Over the years, attempts to establish a common set of aircraft door markings
to accurately align Ground Support Equipment (GSE) have stalled in the absence
of an industry consensus. Many airlines have attempted to create their own standards,
only to see them incur paint-shop customisation costs then fail to gain recognition
from ground service providers outside their home base.
The solution to tackle this problem comprises standardised door markings and
automated GSE which can operate under human supervision. The process hinges
on a set of aircraft-mounted reflective stickers that are detected by cameras mounted
on the GSE, which then guide the equipment to a precise position flush with the
aircraft door.
Airbus has qualified the reflective markings. They will be available for line-fit
or retro-fit and can be applied to any 100-seat-plus aircraft type.
stropeR
fo
rebmuN
2,500 1.0
0,9
2,000 0,8
0,7
1,500 0,6
0,5
0,4
1,000
0,3
0,2
500
0,1
0
0
Minor Severity Reports
Low Severity Reports
Moderate Severity Reports
High Severity Reports
Damage Rate per 1,000 sectors
Damage Rate excluding minor severity per 1,000 sectors
stropeR
fo
rebmuN
2,500 1.0
0,9
2,000 0,8
0,7
1,500 0,6
0,5
0,4
1,000
0,3
0,2
500
0,1
0
0
Minor Severity Reports
Low Severity Reports
Moderate Severity Reports
High Severity Reports
Damage Rate per 1,000 sectors
Damage Rate excluding minor severity per 1,000 sectors
stropeR
fo
rebmuN
IATA Ground Damage Database
Damage Severity and Rates
Airport ground
support equipment
that docks to aircraft
doors includes
passenger boarding
bridges; passenger
stairs; catering and
cleaning trucks;
ambulifts; and cargo
and belt loaders.
Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1 Q2-Q3 Q4-Q1
2013 2013-2014 2014 2014-2015 2015 2015-2016 2016 2016-2017 2017 2017-2018 2013 2013-2014 2014 2014-2015 2015 2015-2016 2016 2016-2017 2017 2017-2018
9102
-
36#TSAF
01
Targeting the perfect fit
2D & 3D cameras
GSE is equipped with cameras that read
the markings and verify the identification
of the door in question, before calculating
its position and distance from the aircraft.
standard distance sensor
Cameras used for
automated docking.
standard distance sensor
Targeting the perfect fit
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
9102
-
36#TSAF
11
Door identification How the reflective markings proposal works
The markings are based on Aircraft are fitted with two 19x19 cm adhesive markings around each door, as
combinations of 16 different defined by the draft standard SAE AS 6896* ‘aircraft markings for ground support
patterns; each combination equipment alignment’. The marking pattern identifies the aircraft door and its position
can be recognised as a specific relative to the aircraft door. Markings are always at the same relative distance to the
Passenger, Cargo or Bulk door. door sill and door edges regardless of aircraft type. The markings are highly reflective
(e.g. second passenger door to ensure detectability and identification from a sufficiently large distance in all
on aircraft starboard) weather and operating conditions.
* SAE AS 6896 is a draft aerospace standard being written within the SAE AGE-3 committee
(Society of Automotive Engineers, Aircraft Ground Equipment) together with IATA’s GSEE group.
All GSE stakeholders are involved, from airframers, GSE manufacturers and ground handlers
to airports, camera and sensor manufacturers.
GSE is equipped with cameras that read the markings and verify the identification
of the door in question, before calculating its position and distance from the aircraft.
Once this is complete the GSE establishes the bearing to the door. When docked,
the equipment can use the markings to follow any aircraft movements during loading
and unloading and to maintain its position relative to the door.
Airbus began work on the solution in 2014 in conjunction with a wide network of
partners. Several versions of the markings’ design were required before they were
frozen in late 2017. The adhesive stickers are manufactured by Adhetec and the
solution is future-proofed thanks to its ability to use several camera technologies
including 2D and 3D time-of-flight cameras.
Both types of cameras emit light and receive a reflective feedback. 2D cameras use
visible light and receive a 2D view, but can use aircraft door identity. 3D time-of-flight
cameras use infrared light to generate a 3D shape of their environment where the
‘reflective stain’ can be located.
Benefits for aircraft operators
The greatest benefit of the standardised markings is the reduced risk of aircraft
damage from ground equipment. Besides costly material damage and lengthy
insurance settlements, incidents can cause delays and flight operations disruption.
The proposal supports a range of possible solutions from simple guidance to GSE
operator to fully automated GSE docking, addressing the commonplace manpower
shortages at airports around the world. Automation also leads to more predictable
turnaround times, contributing to efficient ground operations that benefit airlines
and airports alike. The solution can be retrofitted to existing equipment. A number
of GSE manufacturers including Mallaghan, TLD and JBT have already expressed
an interest in its standardisation and adoption.
9102
-
36#TSAF
21
Targeting the perfect fit
Trials with airlines
The next step is to facilitate the adoption process. Every change in the ground
handling environment is lengthy, but on the whole the stakeholders’ attitude is positive
and the collaborative work of the standardisation groups advocates for a collectively-
agreed vision of the future of ground handling. Several airlines are already conducting
trials of the adhesive sticker proposal.
Trialling the aircraft reflective markings proposal
easyJet began trialling the GSE marking proposal in partnership with stair
manufacturer Mallaghan at Belfast airport in March 2018, using seven of its A319
aircraft and a prototype automated stair. Since its teams familiarised themselves
with the markings and the alignment process, the results have been promising,
says Dave Cross, until recently easyJet’s ground operations quality and safety
manager and trial supervisor.
Punctuality is the biggest casualty of GSE damage at easyJet. In 2017 the airline
registered door damage on over 75% of its large A320 Family fleet. “Even the minor
damage caused by the majority of incidents requires callout and the input of an
engineer,” Cross says. “At an outstation that could add two to three hours’
unscheduled ground time.”
To reduce the damage risk, easyJet has increased its oversight of GSE maintenance,
making sure the parts that interface with the aircraft fuselage are regularly inspected
and maintained.
Even better, a standardised approach to door markings and GSE automation would
bring big benefits, Cross insists. Yet, as ground operations are not a regulated
environment, “new ideas take a long time to embed.” easyJet’s size and influence
“give us a better shot at helping to get the solution adopted” with the backing
of IATA and the SAE, he says. “Anything that removes the risk of aircraft damage
is to be welcomed. Once proven in operation, this solution is something easyJet Get the FAST app
would consider for line and retrofit,” Cross concludes. Scan the QR code or search
‘Airbus FAST’ on your app store
Targeting the perfect fit
CONCLUSION
A straightforward solution for accurate airport ground support equipment docking, developed by a wide
network of airline and ground service partners and Airbus, is on track for standardisation and industry-wide
adoption after successful operational trials.
Reflecting the collaborative spirit of its development, the proposal is not patented and is publicly available.
It has worked its way through several proofs of concept in partnership with other airframers, airlines, ground
services providers and camera and ground equipment manufacturers.
The proposal’s introduction will significantly reduce the risk of damage at the ramp, lowering the financial
exposure stakeholders face, and help address manpower shortages on the ground, thus enabling further
automation around the aircraft.
9102
-
36#TSAF
31
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8 British Airways is currently trialling Airbus’ adhesive sticker solution for cargo loaders
and is interested in its scalability to all GSE aircraft docking.
“Any aircraft that is damaged whilst on the ground almost inevitably results in delays and
disruption for customers,” says David Anderson, head of ground safety at the airline.
“In addition to the customer impact there is a very long list of associated direct and indirect
costs, including the cost of repairs, hotel accommodation, repatriation, EU261 compensation,
9 ferry flights, loss of goodwill and knock-on cancellations.”
As technology improves so should British Airways’ ability to reduce and then eliminate aircraft
damage, Anderson stresses. “IATA Aircraft Handling Manual Chapter 9 describes in simple terms
what is required to be fitted to GSE to provide a minimum level of protection to the aircraft.”
“The standards are not new and there
10 is evidence that some Ground Service
Providers are starting to actively procure
GSE that complies with these basic
requirements,” Anderson continues.
Yet he says it is “disappointing” that
non-modified GSE is still offered for sale
by some suppliers.
11
Anderson notes that IATA has conducted
studies to assess the cost of modifying
GSE and is very clear that modification
costs are “significantly lower” than the
cost of damage. However with most
12 of the cost of damage currently borne
by the airlines, “there can be little
to incentivise some ground handlers
to invest in the modifications that
are commercially available to reduce
the damage risk.”
13 And what of Airbus’ involvement in standardisation efforts? “Airbus has actively supported
work to identify an interface between GSE and the aircraft and has worked closely with SAE*
and IATA to design a target that will work with developing technology,” Anderson says.
“The development of an SAE standard for target design should give the industry the confidence
that any new or retrofit solution will be scalable.”
*Society of Automotive Engineers
14 Commenting on the GSE markings trial Anderson says: “As an airline that has conducted some
early trials, the chosen design is small enough to be unobtrusive and has the added benefit that
it may allow some existing markings to be removed.
Evidence would suggest that the GSE manufacturers are actively engaged in developing
equipment that will interact with the targets. Some manufacturers are already trialling GSE with
launch customers, whilst others are openly talking about how they will use the technology.
15
Due to its simplicity, the targets offer opportunities beyond positioning GSE with other obvious
applications being passenger boarding bridge positioning or indeed any other equipment that
engages with the aircraft.”
9102
-
36#TSAF
41
Pilot training
Meeting the need for competent, qualified pilots
To help address the skills gap, Article by
harmonise training quality and meet
Captain Jean-Michel BIGARRE Susannah CRABOL
demand for the estimated 540,000* new Head of Flight Training Flight Training Solutions Manager
AIRBUS AIRBUS
pilots needed worldwide over the next
susannah.crabol@airbus.com
20 years, Airbus has developed the
Airbus Flight Training Reference,
or AFTR, and is now introducing
‘ab-initio’ pilot training for beginners.
*Airbus 2018 Global Services Forecast
9102
-
36#TSAF
51
Pilot training
An integrated complete programme, from beginner
to qualified commercial airline pilot
Civil aviation faces the challenge of continuously improving flight training quality in a
market expanding faster than cadets can be recruited. Reinforcing and improving flying
skills and building airmanship is paramount for continued safe operation of commercial
aircraft.
To facilitate the development of competent, operationally-ready flight crew, the Airbus
Flight Training Reference (AFTR) provides a standard. It is based on the pillars of
quality, safety and competency. Company flight training experts meet frequently with
regulators, airworthiness authorities, industry groups and airlines to develop pragmatic
operational concepts that enable harmonised, cost-effective and rigorous global
standards.
Notably, the AFTR has led to the introduction of specific reinforcement training
modules aimed at reinforcing basic skills such as instrument rating or multi-engine
aircraft exposure. This allows cadets to start Phase III (JOC/MCC) of their flight training
at the same level as their peers and meets the required levels set by the AFTR.
This is an ‘ab-initio’
The Airbus Flight Training Reference
programme that
The AFTR has four goals:
incorporates the
• To raise quality in flight training worldwide
AFTR to apply
• To harmonise the huge diversity of training standards
its high standards amongst worldwide authorities
• To ensure pilot competency
from the very
• To contribute to higher safety levels
beginning
Now in a further step, Airbus is introducing the Airbus Pilot Cadet Training Programme.
This is an ‘ab-initio’ programme incorporating the AFTR to apply its high standards
from the very beginning. The programme is operated in partnership with strategically-
identified flight schools.
The traditional training path to becoming a pilot comprises different phases (see
graphic 1). Airbus is expanding its Competency-Based Training and Assessment
(CBTA – see box overleaf) method to cover the entire path, for the first time
incorporating CBTA into the screening and selection process.
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3 Phase 4 Phase 5
Initial Initial Intermediate Advanced Ops
(Basic) (Basic) Training Training Courses
Training Training
PPL CPL/IR/ME JOC/MCC Type LIFUS
Rating +Ops
Private Commercial Jet Orientation
Pilot Licence Pilot Licence/ Course/
Instrument Rating/ Multi Crew
Multi-Engine Cooperation
Graphic 1
9102
-
36#TSAF
61
Pilot training
Launched in mid-2018, the ab-initio scheme, known as the Airbus Pilot Cadet Training
Programme, is based on EASA international regulations, with the initial phase being
developed in partnership with ENAC, a leading French aeronautics and aviation university.
It was certified by the EASA in December 2018.
Its AFTR-based curriculum is an integrated A320 Family commercial pilot programme that
is optimised for airlines. The primary target is naturally focused on ensuring the safe flight
of our aircraft via the high training standards we employ. The scheme’s stringent entry
requirements and assessment levels guarantee an optimised selection level to ensure the
selected candidates are considered capable of completing the course and therefore remove
cadet ‘fallout’ and precious ‘seats’ among the training chain.
The programme prioritises the development and assessment of fundamental pilot
competencies to better prepare a smooth transition from the training to the operational
environment. This helps students acquire the knowledge, skills and attitude they need
to become a skilled pilot.
The programme was launched in conjunction with the Escuela de Aviación Mexico (EAM)
flight school, located close to Airbus’ training centre in Mexico City. Participating flight
schools are selected according to their ability to meet the standards set by the AFTR;
the shared vision of the quality of their training; and their capacity to meet the volumes
required to support the ab-initio scheme and operators’ requirements.
Like EAM, once audited and selected, participating flight schools and their instructors will
be standardised to the Airbus Pilot Cadet Training Programme operating under Airbus’
supervision. The first batch of cadets began training at EAM in January 2019. A second
flight school, located in South-West France (Angoulême), will join the programme in the
spring of 2019.
What is Type Rating? What is Competency-Based
Training & Assessment (CBTA)?
A type rating is a regulatory agency’s
(EASA or FAA, for example) certification
CBTA is a training concept that focuses
of a pilot to fly a certain aircraft type that
on the development of the eight core competencies
requires additional training beyond the scope
considered necessary to becoming a skilful pilot
of the initial license.
on commercial aircraft. The training programme is
Many commercial pilots have multiple type
completely adapted to the acquisition of these skills,
ratings, allowing them to operate several types
via continual assessment and competency-based
with minimal transition training. This presents
grading throughout the course. time and cost advantages to airlines.
9102
-
36#TSAF
71
Pilot training
Obtaining an Integrated Airline Transport Pilot Licence
Cadets will receive over 750 hours of theoretical training and 200 hours of practical
training during the 20-month ab-initio course. Candidates must be at least 18 years
old and in possession of a High School diploma including mathematics, with a
proficient level of English.
After clearing the rigorous selection process created by Airbus and jointly reviewed
with the flight school, students complete the initial training: an integrated Commercial
Pilot Licence, Instrument Rating and Multi-Engine programme (CPL/IR/ME). They then
become eligible to train as A320 Family pilots and frozen* Airline Transport Pilot
Licence (ATPL) holders at an Airbus Training Centre. This sequenced process presents
airlines with the benefit of recruiting operationally-ready pilots trained to harmonised
standards.
Escuela de Aviación Mexico (EAM) * A frozen ATPL refers to a Commercial Pilot Licence (CPL) holder who has passed
flight school in Mexico City all the ATP theoretical exams. However, they can only pass the ATPL practical exam
to unfreeze their ATP licence once they have logged 1500 flight hours on multi pilot aircraft.
Integrated Airline Transport Pilot Licence (ATPL)
Initial Intermediate Advanced
training training training
Airbus Integrated Jet Orientation Type Optional Airbus
Pilot Commercial Pilot Corse Rating conversion Ops
screening Licence (CPL) Multi Crew course courses
programme Instrument Rating (IR) Cooperation
Multi-Engine (ME) (APS MCC)
Competency-Based Training & Assesment
Cadets demonstrating an exceptional level of learning and competency, combined with a pre-
disposition for teaching and decision-making observed during their Private Pilot Licence (PPL) phase,
may be selected for the Airbus High Potential Pilot Cadet training programme. This incorporates pilot,
instructor and captaincy training with a view to following an optimised career path.
The Competency-Based Training & Assessment (CBTA) programme ensures successful applicants
have the aptitude to acquire the eight ICAO industry-endorsed core piloting competencies:
• Aircraft flight path management – automation
• Aircraft flight path management – manual control
• Application of procedures
• Communication
• Leadership & teamwork
• Problem-solving & decision-making
• Situational awareness
• Workload management
CIS region
23,000
Europe
North America
94,000
69,000
Middle East
57,000
Asia/Pacific
219,000
Africa
25,000
Latin America
53,000
9102
-
36#TSAF
81
Pilot Training
540 000* new pilots needed
over the next 20 years
*Airbus 2018 Global Services Forecast
Benefits for airlines:
A competent and efficient pilot pool
Airlines will see more globally-operational pilots, as students qualifying from the The aim of the AFTR has been
training programme will be able to convert their licence from validity in the country to create a standard of quality in
of acquisition to an alternative licence. The programme incorporates the latest flight training that is a worldwide
safety recommendations and follows the most recent Airbus technical evolutions, reference. The ultimate goals of
thanks to design office and flight test data that is fed back into the course. Airbus are that this reference is
recognised and recommended
The scheme purposefully involves the selected flying schools from the very start
by authorities such as EASA
to ensure the fundamentals of safe flight are instilled and maintained from end
or the FAA, but more practically,
to end. Ultimately, competent and efficient pilots contribute to increased safety
that pilots are trained with the
levels and indirectly to reduced airline operational costs.
Airbus Training Reference to reach
the same flight training level of
Benefits for students
competencies and proficiency.
Strict selection means that students accepted for the ab-initio training are likely This standard is now Airbus’
to make it through to qualification and a return on their investment. The ab-initio reference for working with any
programme can be followed in any location within Airbus’ worldwide training training organisation – and is
network once in place, subject to visa regimes and local approval. Aircraft paving the way for delivering
approved for use as part of the scheme include modern, classic and glass- a worldwide high quality training
cockpit fleets. programme leading to the
continued safe operation
of Airbus aircraft.
Laminar Pilot training
CIS region
23,000
Europe
North America
94,000
69,000
Middle East
57,000
Asia/Pacific
219,000
Africa
25,000
Latin America
53,000
Benefits for flight schools
Beyond the brand recognition, flight schools partnering with Airbus on the ab-initio
scheme benefit from the company’s global network, and strong relationships with
airworthiness authorities and working groups. Flight schools operate entirely under
the Airbus Approved Training Organisation’s responsibility, whereby Airbus provides
all training manuals, documentation and training programmes, operations processes,
and instructor and flight school standardisation. This provides significant cost savings
for the flight schools who no longer have to carry out course development in particular.
Through Airbus, the course is kept up to date in line with the latest fleet, safety and
industry standards.
CONCLUSION
Airlines and future pilots alike will benefit from the Airbus Flight Training Reference and ab-initio cadet training
programme, which emphasise and reinforce the safety culture. Quickly establishing an operationally-ready pool
of pilots qualified to the latest, harmonised highest standards is an important step towards addressing the pilot
shortage and reinforcing basic skills.
Get the FAST app
Scan the QR code or search
‘Airbus FAST’ on your app store
9102
-
36#TSAF
91
xyz
Flying the A220
Design features and airline feedback
Following the partnership between Airbus and Bombardier
and subsequent arrival of the A220 into the Airbus family,
FAST takes a look at the design, innovations and operational
strengths that are the hallmarks of the A220-100 and -300
Interview with
aircraft and speaks to two operators about their experience.
Rob DEWAR
Head of A220
Customer Support & Engineering
AIRBUS
robert.dewar@abc.airbus
99110022
--
3366##TTSSAAFF
0022
9102
-
36#TSAF
12
Flying the A220
Flying the A220
Aligning to a specific market segment
The decision to design and build what became the C Series and then the A220 Family
started with a reflection on what potential customers seemed to need. Nobody was
offering a new aircraft with between 100 and 150 seats. Airbus and Boeing focused on
larger aircraft while Bombardier and their closest rivals targeted the “below 100-seat”
segment. It was clear that many airlines would be keen to operate a state-of-the-art,
comfortable, fuel-efficient aircraft dedicated to the passenger range between these
two segments.
In fact, the predicted market for new aircraft aimed specifically at the 100-150 seat
segment is currently estimated to be around 7,000 aircraft over the next two decades,
half as replacements for ageing fleets and half to keep pace with growth.
Determination to manufacture an aircraft which would meet the particular needs of
operators’ routes and passenger numbers informed every stage of the design process.
Comfort counts
Another key goal was to design aircraft suitable for a travelling public that is growing
in stature as well as in number. The fact that people are larger than before and growing
was taken into account. Rob Dewar, responsible for the development of the A220
Family, explained: “Aircraft designers have always set out to reduce drag and weight
and so on but we added passenger comfort to that list at the earliest stages”.
Addressing the fact that the average person is around 12 kilos heavier than 25 years
ago had a direct impact on the width of the fuselage and the consequent ability to offer
the widest economy seats.
With the wider cabin comes larger luggage bins. Again, these are ideal for today’s
travellers who prefer to take their belongings into the cabin on short-haul flights.
‘Cabin-only’ luggage also facilitates the fast turnarounds that are of great importance
to airlines operating on tight schedules and fine margins.
There is even a bonus feature of the wider cabin that is primarily about the ‘feel’ rather
than specific measurements. The overall impression of space that is created by
increased shoulder and head-room, and the wider seats, creates the perception that
there is also increased pitch compared to competitors. “Airlines tell us that their
customers often comment on the extra legroom even though the pitch actually remains
standard,” says Dewar. “That tells us something about the psychological effect of an
overall feeling of comfort and a seat that fits your proportions.”
Delivering on costs
Much of the technological innovation in the A220 targets the operating costs.
The aircraft’s fuel burn figures are a particular strength, amounting to 20% per seat
compared to previous generations in the segment.
Around one third of these fuel burn gains come from the lightweight structures and
advanced systems. Extensive use was made of advanced aluminium for the main
fuselage with Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic (CFRP), selected for construction
of the wing, nacelle and aft fuselage. Developed alongside pilot, the cockpit includes
sidesticks for intuitive flying, LCD displays, integrated flight management systems,
an electronic checklist and head-up displays.
The Pratt & Whitney geared turbofan engines account for approximately two thirds
of the overall fuel-burn reduction. They share a lot of common architecture with the
A320neo Family engines but have a smaller, 73-inch fan. “As is usually the case there
was work to be done on the maturity of a brand new, highly advanced powerplant but
they’re now in service and performance and reliability are both good,” says Dewar.
The cockpit was developed
alongside pilots. It includes
sidesticks for intuitive flying,
LCD displays, integrated flight
management systems,
an electronic checklist
and head-up displays.
9102
-
36#TSAF
22
Flying the A220
Designed for short and long-haul
– and a challenging airport
Choosing to concentrate on one airport in
particular might seem unusual, but knowing that
launch operator SWISS was planning to fly out of
London City offered the designers a challenge that
became a strength. “It’s a difficult airport because
the runway is short and the surrounding
environment means that a steep approach and
take-off are required,” Dewar explains. “SWISS
had been restricted to 100-seat aircraft because
of this but the A220 has allowed it to increase its
capacity while using the same slots at the same
airport.” The same advanced technology means
that 99% of the world’s airports are accessible
to the A220 Family.
SWISS is using its A220s on short routes that
involve completing seven or eight legs every day.
The A220-100 deals with short fields and steep
approaches while the A220-300 offers additional
seats and further cost per seat reductions.
In a contrasting approach airBaltic is capitalising
on the A220’s ability to go long-haul – up to 3,200
nautical miles. The Latvian carrier is using A220-
300s on six to seven hour flights, including a new
route from Riga to Abu Dhabi. The aircraft is at the
centre of its growth strategy and was re-ordered
only a year after its first -300 entered commercial
service.
9102
-
36#TSAF
32
Flying the A220
Head-Up Display
9102
-
36#TSAF
42
Flying the A220
A220: the airlines’ view
Peter KOCH SWISS’ A220 Fleet Chief, explains the airline’s experience
of operating the A220:
Have you had feedback on comfort levels from passengers? Are there
any features of the cabin that seem particularly popular?
The feedback from our passengers is very positive. They mostly appreciate the
welcoming, bright cabin, the comfortable seats and the large windows as well
as the fact that there is more space in the overhead bins and ample legroom.
Also our cabin crews are pleased with the A220s. For example, they appreciate
the spacious overhead bins and the ergonomic galleys. Last but not least, they
benefit from the positive perception of the customers and their appreciation
of the state-of-the-art aircraft.
How do your pilots find the cockpit and systems?
They have a lot of praise for the new aircraft. They are particularly impressed
with how intuitive it is to fly and the perfect situational awareness provided
by the large displays and the head-up displays.
How do you use your A220s? Are they particularly suited to these
routes and airports; if so, why?
They offer a high degree of flexibility when it comes to our flight operations.
With this aircraft, we’re able to operate on longer routes, such as Moscow,
Cairo or Hurghada, as well as at operationally challenging airports with short
and narrow runways and complex approaches, such as London City and
Florence. At the same time, the A220 is an all-rounder that can be used for
all our other short- and medium-haul destinations. From and to London City,
the A220 allows us to transport more passengers than with any other aircraft.
The A220-100 is currently the biggest aircraft flying into LCY which means we
Largest
can offer more seats on this important route with the same amount of flights.
Straight sidewalls for windows
increased personal space Largest stowage Excellent head clearance for best view
and comfort in its class provided by pivot bins of the sky
Are your aircraft delivering on performance and operating cost
promises?
The technical reliability lies in the nineties, which is a good value for a newly
designed aircraft. Swiss and Airbus A220 teams continue to work together
to continuously mature the aircraft in order to reach a comparable value with
the other aircraft in the SWISS fleet.
Overall, the new aircraft helped to decrease our unit costs. Thanks to the
Widest
A220, costs can be reduced by 25% per seat in comparison with the Avro
economy
RJ100 through lower maintenance costs and more fuel-efficient engines.
class
We are pleased to report that certain performance parameters such as fuel
Wide
seats
consumption and range have proven substantially better than agreed.
business class
The fuel consumption is 20-25% lower compared with the Avro RJ100.
seats
It is also quieter than comparable aircraft types which is very important
for densely populated areas.
Overall, how would you describe your experience of operating A220s
so far?
All in all, SWISS is satisfied with the performance of the A220. With the
state-of-the-art technologies that it incorporates, and with its engines,
systems and construction materials, the A220 sets new benchmarks
in terms of both its operating economics and its environmental credentials. Wide aisle
Optimised cross-section
Largest
Straight sidewalls for windows
increased personal space Largest stowage Excellent head clearance for best view
and comfort in its class provided by pivot bins of the sky
Widest
economy
class
Wide
seats
business class
seats
Wide aisle
9102
-
36#TSAF
52
Flying the A220
9102
-
36#TSAF
62
Flying the A220
Right sized for 100-150 seats Latest generation engines State-of-the-art aerodynamics
NOx emissions
20% 18* 50%
lower fuel burn & CO emissions EPNdB margin to chapter 4 below CAEP/6
2
* Figures as at 15 March 2019
9102
-
36#TSAF
72
Flying the A220
airBaltic’s SVP Technical Operations, Andris VAIVODS also shared
his view on how their new aircraft have started working life:
How have your crew found working in the A220 cabin? Are the health monitoring/predictive
maintenance systems proving useful?
The Airbus A220-300 is the most modern aircraft of its size.
Our crew are satisfied about being able to fly on the aircraft on The most notable benefits we’ve seen from
a daily basis. Its new features make the duties more convenient proactive maintenance are reduced maintenance
and a true pleasure. costs, increased reliability, decreased number
of flight delays and airplane downtime for
troubleshooting, as well as continued improvement
How do your pilots find the cockpit and systems? of our punctuality and regularity rates.
Feedback from the pilots has been very good – they feel that To prepare for the proactive maintenance
the cockpit has been designed ‘by pilots for pilots’ as their capabilities, airBaltic maintenance staff took
wishes and needs have been met. The latest avionics and other an Aircraft Health Monitoring System course.
technologies on the Airbus A220-300 ease the daily duties In addition, duties for some positions within our
of airBaltic teams significantly. company were adjusted to monitor maintenance
data coming from the fleet and the company IT
system was set up to route and store the relevant
How do you use your A220s? Are they particularly suited data.
to these routes and airports; if so, why?
Once the aircraft lands, all the maintenance data
The Airbus A220-300 provides both greater capacity and longer is automatically off-loaded to company servers.
range than our current fleet. Because of that, the aircraft operates To find the desired report, you only need to access
on such popular routes as Amsterdam, Barcelona, Budapest, the server. Manual download is also possible by
Rome, Moscow, Nice, London, Paris, Vienna, Athens, Madrid and writing the maintenance report to a USB stick or
many others. Notably, the longer range of the aircraft has enabled printing out smaller reports on a cockpit printer.
airBaltic to launch direct flights to destinations such as Abu Dhabi, The data is analysed by our reliability engineers
Almaty, Malaga and Lisbon. who keep a close eye on it.
All of the engineers have access to the data. After
analysis it is discussed during periodic engineering
Are your aircraft delivering on performance and operating
meetings where decisions on preventive actions
cost promises?
are made. Most critical data affecting airplane
The aircraft has performed beyond our expectations, delivering dispatchability is delivered to maintenance and
better overall performance, fuel efficiency and convenience for engineering staff while the aircraft is in flight, before
both staff and the passengers. The fuel economy has reached it has landed. So, once the airplane reaches the
22% and in 2018, the regularity of Airbus A220-300 flights reached gate, the maintenance team has everything in
99.76%. Notably, Airbus A220-300 provides very high utilisation place to rectify any sudden problem. This results
rates. Our aircraft have flown up to 18 block hours per day. in minimum effect on flight schedules.
Have you had feedback on comfort levels from passengers? Overall, how would you describe your
Are there any features of the cabin that seem particularly experience of operating A220s so far?
popular?
The introduction of Airbus A220-300 has been
Already, every third airBaltic passenger enjoys the higher comfort very successful and provided the additional
level provided by the Airbus A220-300 fleet. It offers an excellent efficiency any airline is seeking in the highly
flying experience with benefits such as wider seats, larger competitive aviation market. Thanks to the good
windows, more hand luggage space, and improved lavatories. overall performance, airBaltic took a decision
The feedback we receive from passengers is overwhelmingly to introduce a single type fleet that will consist
positive. If we look at revenue data, we see that advanced seat of up to 80 Airbus A220-300 aircraft.
reservation is especially popular on the Airbus A220-300.
With the larger windows, window seats are the most popular
selection among passengers.
Over the summer we also launched an improved cabin with new,
comfortable seats on our Airbus A220-300 aircraft. Passengers
now benefit from such additional improvements as more legroom,
new pockets behind the seats for magazines, as well as hangers
next to the seat for jackets.
Flying the A220
A220 Family - the story so far
In-service status Orders and deliveries
• 90,000+ revenue flights, • 536 orders from
120,000+ flight hours 19 customers
• 170+ routes • 60 deliveries
(130+ destinations) to 5 operators
(SWISS, airBaltic, Korean Air,
• 7,000,000+ passengers
Delta Air Lines, Air Tanzania)
(estimation assuming 80% load factor)
• 476 in backlog
• 18+ hours daily utilisation,
as of February 2019
up to 13 legs per day
Family commonality and differences
Commonality is very high between the A220-100 and the A220-300, above 99 %.
This allows a common spare inventory which reduces investment and maintenance
costs as well as training costs for mechanics and crew.
Nevertheless, the aircraft are neither stretches nor shrinks of each other and there are
some important technical differences between the siblings:
• The nose landing gear is common for both the -100 and -300, and the main landing
gear for the -300 has been slightly reinforced due to the aircraft’s higher weight.
• The -300 brake stack assembly has one additional pair of stator/rotator assemblies
compared to the -100’s three.
• The wing and the centre wing box have been structurally reinforced to carry the
load increase.
• The centre fuselage for the -300 is 3.4 m longer and was also structurally reinforced
to carry the higher loads.
• Environmental control systems are identical except for an additional bleed leak
detection sensing element to accommodate fuselage length differences.
9102
-
36#TSAF
82
Designed together for the highest commonality
Future developments
The A220-300 has achieved 180-minute ETOPS (extended range, twin-engined
operation) approval, from the Canadian authorities with FAA and EASA to follow,
which makes it unique in its class. Although the approval is actually based on the
Get the FAST app
distance from a diversion airport, over land or sea, when one engine fails, ETOPS
Scan the QR code or search ‘Airbus allows the aircraft to cross large expanses of ocean so routes such as New York
FAST’ on your preferred store to London and Seoul to Darwin are now possible.
Also now certified is the addition of Category 3B auto-landing which provides for safe
landing in zero-visibility conditions as long as the airport is also equipped to the
required standard. “These developments are both extremely useful to many existing
and potential customers but they are just part of an on-going strategy of constant
improvement and innovation,” says Dewar. “We’re also looking at adding more seats,
improving the flight deck, and further performance enhancements.”
CONCLUSION
Although the A220 Family has many of the advanced technologies that are associated with larger
aircraft, they were incorporated with the customers and passengers of the 100-150 seat segment
firmly in mind. This methodical ‘designing-in’ played a key role in the creation of two aircraft that
complement the wider Airbus Family.
9102
-
36#TSAF
92
Flying the A220
>99% LRU
Commonality
Common Spares
3.7m longer mid fuselage
Common Structures
& Systems
A220-100 A220-300
Range 5,460 km 5,920 km
System optimization Typical seating 116 141
for A220-300 Overall length 35.0 m 38.7 m
9102
-
36#TSAF
03
Data management
What big data is doing for aviation
The rise of ‘big data’ and data analytics has been
acknowledged throughout the business world for some time.
With its Skywise data-sharing platform, Airbus is working
Article by (left to right)
with customers and suppliers to use the aviation industry’s
Norman BAKER
data more effectively than ever before. It is a collaborative
Head of Digital Solutions
approach designed to benefit everyone involved. norman.baker@airbus.com
Matthew EVANS
Head of Analytics Accelerator
The birth of big data – and the challenge for aviation
matthew.evans@airbus.com
The analysis of big data did not originate in the aviation industry. It grew out of the
rapid boom in on- line, consumer-oriented businesses and social media platforms.
The companies involved realised that, thanks to the billions of interactions taking
place, algorithms could be used to analyse and predict patterns of behaviour.
Airbus, like all aircraft manufacturers, has always recorded data meticulously for safety
reasons and made use of it to refine its products. A single A320 can generate up to
24,000 parameters of data, adding up to ten gigabytes, every flight hour. However,
data around the aircraft was traditionally recorded using a variety of means ranging
from binary coding through numerical systems to photographs and video footage.
Also, the number of aircraft and flights in the global fleet is far smaller than the billions
of internet users worldwide so the total volume of data available is not on the scale
available to leading consumer and social media brands. That makes reliable analysis
through algorithms alone much more difficult.
A further complication in making data work for aviation lies in the unique nature
of every aircraft. As well as having cabin and engineering differences according
to the requirements of customers, every aircraft builds a specific history over time with
lengths of trips, number of legs in a day, weather and passenger numbers varying
according to how, where and when it is operated. Without expert understanding,
much of this data can prove to be irrelevant or, worse still, misleading.
Context
& Environement
Operations
Supply Chain
Network
People
& user
experience
In-service
fleet
Information
Systems
Manufacturing Support
Engineering
9102
-
36#TSAF
53
Data management
Collecting and securing data with Skywise
The first key requirement for Skywise to be successful is an extensive data pool that
is harmonised to make it accessible to analytics which run across all of the inputs.
To build that, Airbus worked with well-established partners to make a secure system
that includes operating data from participating airlines, flight test campaigns, fleet
data, and the original design processes and in-service updates. To make data taken
from so many different sources into a homogenous whole which can be analysed,
a standardisation process takes place. This doesn’t mean that any data is deleted
or altered, it is simply transferred into a standardised format so comparisons can be
made and patterns spotted.
As well as its previously exclusive access to flight test and design data, Airbus also
adds its expertise in aeronautical engineering. It uses a team of over 20,000 highly
qualified aviation professionals to ensure that when analysis takes place it is based
on the data that matters most and that the results are properly understood before
anyone draws conclusions.
Who owns the Skywise data?
Attitudes to data ownership vary around the world with some cultures embracing
data-sharing as being central to innovation that will benefit all, while others see data
as something to guard and protect.
The Skywise approach is designed to suit both views. It starts from the premise
that data only has real value once it can be used effectively, therefore sharing
will be of greater benefit as participation widens. Nevertheless, all data remains under
the control of the entities that join Skywise and in the ‘big picture’ that they can see
and analyse, everything except their own data is anonymous to them. It is also
possible to leave Skywise and withdraw own data although the trend is for users
to appreciate the benefits and actually add more data over time.
Put simply, the original contributor of any data put into Skywise
maintains control over that data.
9102
-
36#TSAF
13
9102
-
36#TSAF
23
Data management
What are the practical benefits of Skywise?
For airlines…...............................................................................................................................
After the pooling and harmonisation of data, airlines can • LATAM reduced the fraction of mechanical issues leading
monitor the performance and health of their aircraft much more to delays from 24% to 15% by identifying repeated issues,
accurately. This allows much more effective planning of routine anticipating occurrences, and taking preventive action.
maintenance and a more rapid response to any issues which
• Bangkok Airways reported that joining Skywise core resulted
do occur. One of the 60 airlines using the core version of
in on-time performance increasing significantly in 2018.
Skywise which is available to all Airbus customers reported
• Japan Airlines said that the time spent on collecting data
a 50% drop in maintenance-related delays. There are also
decreased dramatically, saving hundreds of hours while
proven fuel burn savings and other efficiency benefits while
giving more time to engineers to perform analysis. This led
almost any data-heavy task is made far easier. For example,
to higher aircraft reliability.
a typical Reliability Report used to take around three weeks
to complete but Skywise users are now compiling them in a • At AirAsia Group, users leveraged Skywise to create
matter of minutes with a single click. With the data-gathering dynamic CG (centre of gravity) targets that consider all
side of the task already taken care of, airlines can move fuel-impacting parameters leading to reduced fuel penalties
straight to analysis and action. and significant financial savings.
Other benefits have varied according to the focus of individual Ten of the 60 participating airlines are also using the paid-for
airlines but a few practical examples confirm that using predictive maintenance service which is working towards the
Skywise core makes real operational differences. target of zero aircraft on ground. The plateau devoted to this
is staffed by a mixture of data scientists and engineers,
a combination that is leading to some creative solutions.
Air Arabia started using Skywise Predictive Maintenance on
its fleet of 60 A320 Family aircraft in early December of 2018.
FAST asked Allan FULLILOVE, the airline’s Head of Engineering,
how things were going so far.
“
Skywise Predictive Maintenance is simple to use and As a low-cost operator, we wish to achieve the
projects data in an easily digestible manner. The display highest operational use of the aircraft. Changing
graphs allow swift interpretation of data and that allows unscheduled reactions to a positive scheduled
quick, easy decision-making. planning will create the necessary benefits to
maintain this. Skywise Predictive Maintenance
Integration was easy to us as we assembled a group of
is therefore considered another vital tool
engineering specialists who had previously undertaken
to achieve this goal.
investigation-based tasks. They have started looking
at historical data to assess reliability and they’re now The ability to look at an aircraft’s technical
applying forward-looking analytics which means performance at component or system level
predictive data with Skywise Predictive Maintenance. performance and to then plan and execute
corrective actions at scheduled opportunities
We work differently now by adapting our processes
can only bring greater value and savings.
from the traditional reactive approach to a more
And this is all done from an engineering desk
strategic approach based on planning to create
away from the aircraft.
a better operational protection envelope.
Over the last 30 years maintenance activities have
We are more forward looking and, as we accumulate
seen little change with each operator sharing more
experience moving from reacting to defects, which
or less the same focus on reaction-based solutions.
tends to mean unscheduled maintenance, we’re
Now, much needed change is fast becoming a
moving to a more scheduled workload.
reality through projects such as Skywise Predictive
We have had a few good results on Skywise Predictive Maintenance. The use of big data to effect this is
Maintenance that have prevented delays, and as the now very real. For us, this is a very positive step
product matures we expect to see more. in the right direction. ”
9102
-
36#TSAF
33
Data management
............................................................................................................................... For Airbus…........................................... For suppliers…...................................................
One simple benefit is that Skywise helps Airbus to build better Skywise for Suppliers is in the early adopters phase which is
products. The larger volume of data, including operating data dedicated to defining, developing and testing the platform
from airlines, means that the monitoring and analysis of fleet functionalities that will serve to make a step change between
performance are more accurate than ever before, thus enabling Airbus and its partners and suppliers. There are already 15
preventive and corrective measures. early adopter suppliers in the platform.
The best example of this is the entry into service of the Skywise aims to serve as a single access point for Airbus and
A350 XWB which rapidly achieved high levels of maturity suppliers to share relevant diverse data, to perform powerful
at the same time as the programme was engaged in a steep data analytics, and to allow more informed decisions. This
ramp-up. Once the first delivery was made, information should bring significant improvements in aircraft performance
gathered from the flight test campaign and design office and operational excellence.
was joined by a continuous flow of in-service data from early
The overall goal is to implement the concept of the extended
customers. This allowed root cause analysis of issues, and
enterprise, enhancing cooperation between Airbus and its
potential issues, which were then addressed rapidly meaning
suppliers.
that subsequent aircraft benefited more quickly than ever
before. In the area of industrial performance, for example, some
participating suppliers have moved from taking a few days
Another crucial benefit for Airbus is the ability to respond to
to a few minutes when identifying candidates to swap sections
customer requests for bespoke solutions much more quickly
in the production line. This has enabled them to keep to
than before. The old response cycle involved launching
delivery dates. In other cases, finding and sharing the root
development if customers expressed an interest in a particular
causes of quality problems has been improved from taking
area. By the time development and certification were complete
weeks to taking just days.
18 months had usually passed, which meant that the solution
might no longer be needed or the need had become less In the area of in-service, Skywise is in the experimentation
urgent. There is now a library of previously developed and phase and striving to define a way to speed up the root cause
certified ‘blocks’ of digital services and these can be combined analysis of in-service issues in cooperation with suppliers.
into a solution that directly and quickly addresses the Thanks to data sharing and analysis through Skywise, real
customer’s need. progress looks possible in areas such as Aircraft on Ground,
Major In-Service Problems, No Fault Found, and more.
Skywise now usually offers digital solutions within a few weeks
Preliminary results are promising, with a double-digit
of customer requests. That is a far better fit with the aspirations
percentage reduction in time. Data governance, data
of a customer focused company and with its customers’
anonymisation, data ontology and setting up a scalable
expectations.
solution are some of the most important activities in this area.
CONCLUSION
Although there is still plenty of room for Skywise to grow, it is already proving its value in practice for
operators and for Airbus and suppliers. They will soon be joined by additional suppliers and other aviation
industry stakeholders. As momentum gathers, the volume of data will increase and further possibilities
will open up. The mutual benefits generated by sharing data are becoming increasingly apparent.
Get the FAST app
Scan the QR code or search
‘Airbus FAST’ on your app store
9102
-
36#TSAF
43
FANS C
Latest technology for air traffic management
Article by (left to right)
FANS C is the latest datalink technology for communication Thierry HARQUIN
ATM International Cooperation coordinator
between air traffic control and aircraft, developed by Airbus.
AIRBUS
It brings major benefits both for air traffic management thierry.harquin@airbus.com
at a time when delays are growing, and for airlines thanks Jerome CONDIS
Multi Program Projects Manager
to its 4D trajectory (see box) management potential.
AIRBUS
It is now being used in a major in-service demonstration jerome.condis@airbus.com
with airlines to confirm how beneficial it could be.
What is FANS?
The Future Air Navigation System (FANS) concept FANS 1/A technology was designed to cover oceanic and remote
originated from ICAO. Its aim was to provide a data areas where no radar coverage exists. It is mandatory for airlines
link between aircraft and the air traffic control services flying North Atlantic routes. Since then, it has also been deployed in
that organise the flow of aircraft to and from airports. other areas, including domestic North American airspaces. In these
areas, Airbus has been offering its FANS A+ (originally FANS A)
In all areas, FANS replaces voice contact between
solution.
ATM and pilots with a text-based system which is
similar to sending and receiving SMS messages. ATN B1 technology was designed for domestic flights within
This proves particularly useful in circumstances where Europe where radar coverage was already present. Again, it is
voice signals could be unclear by avoiding any mandatory for airlines operating in this area and Airbus has been
confusion and the need to repeat instructions and offering its FANS B+ solution.
requests. The use of digital communication also
B2 technology was designed to cover all existing operations,
opens the door to advanced system automation, both
including FANS 1/A and ATN B1, and to address emerging
in the cockpit and ground systems, which permits
operations being explored as part of ATM renovation programmes,
significant workload reduction for flight crew and
such as SESAR in Europe or NextGen in US.
controllers.
FANS C, the latest Airbus datalink version, introduces B2 for the
There are currently two technologies, FANS 1/A and
very first time on any airframe, while combining all of the features
ATN B1, which are already widespread, and even
of FANS A+ and FANS B+ in a single, harmonised product. FANS C
mandatory in many geographical areas. B2 is the new
provides the airlines with continued worldwide datalink operations
emerging technology that will support introduction
and opens up the possibility of 4D trajectory planning that includes
of new ATM techniques and gradually replace other
time as an extra dimension.
technologies.
9102
-
36#TSAF
53
FANS C
What is a 4D trajectory?
The full 4D trajectory management is one of the key pillars of the European ATM target concept
for 2020+ as defined by the SESAR (Single European Sky ATM Research ) programme which aims
to manage worldwide air traffic growth and increasing environmental constraints.
The aircraft trajectory is collaboratively designed by the aircraft operator and the ANSPs before
the flight. It takes into account the airline’s business criteria and the air traffic constraints in the
concerned areas. During flight it can be updated through avionics systems, in order to integrate new
constraints such as meteorological changes. The trajectory is defined in four dimensions (4D) which
are composed of the three geometrical dimensions (latitude, longitude and altitude), plus the time.
The Time Of Arrival (TOA) at each waypoint along the trajectory is estimated with improved accuracy
and reliability compared to previous approaches.
These predictions are not aiming at constraining the aircraft along all the waypoints during the flight,
unless this is required by traffic constraints; they are being used to get a more accurate picture of the
traffic flow evolution far in advance, and then to adjust it efficiently with the offered airspace capacity.
The approach uses 4D trajectories from takeoff to landing (even for airport surface operations in the
ultimate steps), and requires significant improvements and upgrades in ground Air Traffic Management
systems and procedures, as well as in the airline operation’ control centres.
4D Trajectory predicted by the Flight Management System
Vertical
Top of
Top of Climb
Climb
Horizontal
08:57:22 09:15:47 09:40:21 09:48:38
Time
08:50:12 09:01:10 09:35:58 09:44:05 09:54:40
- periodically e.g. every 15 min
Downlink triggered by ATC: - on event e/.g. if more than 30 seconds late at a waypoint
- on demand as needed by ATC
What are the key benefits of FANS C?
The first and most obvious benefit is that an aircraft can now be equipped with a
single system. This responds to requests from Airbus customers who wanted to move
away from choosing between FANS A and B.
The second key advantage is the introduction of 4D trajectory planning possibilities
into the field of ATM. Aircraft can share their active flight plan - including anticipated
times, speeds and altitudes - with equipped Air Navigation Service Providers (ANSPs)
and this is expected to reduce the increasing number of ATM-related delays at busy
destinations.
With FANS C aircraft, ground ANSP will have a better and more accurate predictability
of traffic flows. 4D trajectory aircraft data will be able to feed a wide variety of
automation tools used today by controllers to monitor, organise and sequence traffic
in a given airspace sector and even beyond. With more predictable traffic data and
additional automation tools, the controller workload could be reduced and additional
air traffic control capacity can be envisaged. To close the air-ground synchronisation
loop, FANS C aircraft can automatically update the onboard FMS flight plan based on
uplinked route instructions, once the flight crew have reviewed and accepted them.
Such automation, reducing the flight crew workload, is also a crucial enabler to allow
smooth introduction of complex route clearance uplinks into the datalink Air Traffic
Control exchanges. FANS C will contribute to the improvement of capacity in ATM
congested areas in Europe but also in others parts of the world.
9102
-
36#TSAF
63
FANS C
“
What’s in it for airlines? Air France supports FANS C / 4D and
decided to be actively involved in the
Recent figures (as for instance highlighted by Central Office for Delay Analysis SESAR DIGITS demo by retrofitting 25
(CODA) from Eurocontrol) show that ATM-related delays are growing as the global aircraft because, in the short term, this
fleet increases. Improved capacity in air traffic management will help reduce delays should highly improve the flight
for airlines, particularly those relying on fast, on-time turnarounds as part of their predictability from an ATC and network
operations. management perspective. As a
consequence, we could expect a more
Other benefits will be confirmed during the large-scale demonstration in Europe
optimised use of the available en-route
which is being organised as part of SESAR*. 4D trajectory planning may well lead
capacity as well as flight efficiency
to optimised descents being possible more often and this would reduce fuel burn.
improvement for the arrival flows
FANS C includes the technology to enable this but exactly how it will work for
towards the major European hubs.
ANSPs remains to be seen. For now, ATM systems will continue to place
constraints on individual aircraft for a variety of reasons so optimised trajectories In the longer term, FANS C / ATN B2
will not always be available although their frequency should increase. will be the cornerstone for the
trajectory-based operations and ATC
Operators may also find an increase in residual value of their aircraft. The installation
a utomation. ”
of FANS C will “future-proof” their assets if the technology becomes mandatory
in more areas of the world while the optimised route planning will always be of value
Laurent Renou
in its own right. Furthermore, any FANS C aircraft will be able to fly anywhere so the
Air France Flight Operations engineering,
possible need to re-equip it for a new operator would be avoided. Head of ATM/CNS/SESAR
Assessing FANS C in Europe and China
A large-scale demonstration of FANS C is underway and 100 in-service A320 Family aircraft will be equipped
with the new certified technology by the middle of 2020. The demonstration is known as DIGITS
(Demonstration of Air Traffic Management Improvements Generated by Initial Trajectory Sharing)
and is part of the Single European Sky ATM Research (SESAR) initiative.
The focus on the A320 Family is to allow the assessment of the maximum number of flight cycles
as they are very commonly used on short-haul flights within Europe.
Seven European airlines (Air France, British Airways, EasyJet, Iberia, Novair, Thomas Cook
and Wizzair), are participating and data will be collected from over 20,000 flights. They will be
working alongside Airbus, suppliers and the ANSPs for Germany, the UK, Benelux and Italy
to ascertain the exact benefits of FANS C in practice.
Aircraft from the participating airlines will generate ‘extended projected profiles’ (the
four-dimensional flight path) data via downlink messages triggered by air traffic control.
Analysis of this ‘big data’ will be enriched with feedback captured from controllers and
pilots so that operational experience will be built up to support the general deployment.
Airborne deployment of FAN C / ATN B2 (SESAR Demonstration)
100 92 96 98 100
90 83 85 86 Equipped
80 78 aircraft
70 66
60 57
48
50 46
40 36 34
31
28
30 24
20 18 21
2 1 0 0 1 2 7 1 2 4 5 7 10 12 15 of D Cu IG m IT u S la f t l i i v g e h t n s u / m 10 b 0 e 0 r
0
0
Jan -
19
Feb -
19
Mar -
19
Apr -
19
May -
19
Jun -
19
Jul -
19
Aug -
19
Sep -
19
Oct -
19
Nov -
19
Dec -
19
Jan -
20
Feb -
20
Mar -
20
Apr -
20
May -
20
Jun -
20
An additional demonstration is taking place in China with a single flight involving an
airline-equipped aircraft still under Airbus ownership. This is a technology trial rather
than a data-gathering demonstration but of interest to the Chinese authorities (CAAC)
to discover more about the potential of FANS C.
9102
-
36#TSAF
73
FANS C
* What is SESAR?
“
Launched in 2004 by the European Union, SESAR (Single European Sky ATM Research) is a
EasyJet decided to support public-private partnership whose objective is to increase ATM performance and build a more
the FANS C / 4D demo intelligent air transport system. Today, the SESAR Joint Undertaking, founded in 2007 to manage
because we understood this partnership, features over 100 companies and 3,000 experts working in Europe and beyond.
the significance of live flight
According to SESAR, in 2012 there were 9.5 million European flights carrying 700 million
trials to verify this important
passengers. In 2035 those projections call for 14.4 million flights and 1.4 billion passengers.
enabler for the future
This increased volume of aircraft can only be sustained if new ATM processes are developed
European airspace.
and deployed to replace today’s ageing system.
Captain Dan Wood
A key component of facilitating more traffic is 4D trajectory technology. The idea is to share the
Flight Operations Technical
airborne intended trajectory with air traffic control (ATC) and take advantage of avionics functions
Manager, EasyJet. ”
to improve air traffic management processes. By upgrading the existing airborne and ground
systems with 4D software, both the ATC and the flight crew can proactively know and agree on
the trajectory to be flown and share the most accurate time predictions all along the route.
4D technology was first demonstrated on an A320 flight in 2012. Since then, dozens of A320
Family ferry flights between Hamburg and Toulouse have been used to help mature the technology.
In 2014, the technology took another step forward with a wide-scale demonstration flight in
real-world conditions. On a flight from Toulouse to Stockholm in Sweden via Copenhagen in Denmark,
local ATCs provided six ‘controlled time of arrival (CTA)’ points. At each CTA point, the aircraft was
within plus/minus 10 seconds and the flight crew reported no disruption in their activities.
The technology is now certified on Airbus A320 Family aircraft and being demonstrated on a large
scale through the DIGITS project.
Get the FAST app
Scan the QR code or search ‘Airbus
FAST’ on your preferred store
GLOSSARY
ANSP Air Navigation Service Providers NextGen
ATM Air Traffic Management NextGen is the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) programme
to modernise the air transportation system for the United States of
DIGITS Demonstration of air traffic management
America. This comprehensive initiative relies on satellite navigation
Improvements Generated by Initial
and advanced digital communications, to help improve and evolve
Trajectory Sharing
the National Airspace System.
CONCLUSION
Many of the possible benefits of FANS C will be confirmed once the data generated by the DIGITS
is analysed. However, the immediate benefits of a single, harmonised product converging FANS A
and B while adding new capabilities are clear now.
While reconciling the datalink technologies of the past, FANS C is above all a breakthrough
innovation that leads the way towards the 4D trajectory based operations, commonly recognised
as the cornerstone of ATM optimisation and efficiency.
esuoluoT
-
euqehtoreA
dna
egatireH
etaroproC
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
otohP
FAST FROM THE PAST
There wouldn’t be any future without the experience of the past.
These 1930 photos of Dornier
aircraft show that cabin comfort
- especially at mealtime -
is nothing new.
Today’s Airbus aircraft also offer high standards in cabin comfort, as well as in safety. See cabin waste article page 4
And in addition, with environmental awareness, airlines may soon be using meal
trolleys that help cabin crew sort recyclable cabin waste.
The Armagnac SE-2010,
built by the SNCASE (Société
Nationale de Construction
Aéronautique du Sud Est)
at Toulouse flew for the first
time in April 1949.
It was designated as a long-range aircraft capable of carrying 100 passengers. See pilot training article page 14
The illustration shows the full-sized cockpit mock-up used for studying
the instrument layout and for crew training. Note that the controls
for the four engines are suspended from just above the windshield.
9102
-
36#TSAF
83
Around the clock, around the world
Airbus has over 300 field reps, at over 140 stations around the world
Technical, Material & Logistics
9102
-
36#TSAF
93
Field
Service
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Spares RTN/USR, WSP and HMV Orders
Support Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 For Europe, Africa, Middle East,
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 3500
Asia-Pacific & China: Please contact your
airtac@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936 dedicated Single Point of Contact (SPOC).
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964 More info:
AOG Spares Centre of Competence
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
For Europe, Africa, Middle East, Fax:+49 (0)40 5076 4012
Asia-Pacific & China: ifd.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001
For Americas:
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011
Please contact your dedicated
aog.spares@airbus.com
Single Point of Contact (SPOC).
For Americas: More info:
Tel: +1 70 3729 9000 cod.americas@airbus.com
Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
aog.na@airbus.com
Training
Visit Airbus.com/Support and Services/Training
CAN TOO.
FLY
WE MAKE IT
Introducing two clever ways to grow
your business. The A220-100 and
A220-300 are the newest members
of our single aisle family – covering the
market from 100 up to 240 seats and
flying up to 4,000nm. And with the
very latest in cabin ergonomics your
passengers will be as comfortable as
your profit margin.
Profitability. We make it fly.
airbus.com
14043_AIR_Single_Aisle_297x210_FAST_Magazine_1.0.indd 1 06/03/2019 12:13
HIgh Sierra:Users:drolfe:Desktop:14043_AIR_Single_Aisle_297x210_FAST_Magazine_1.0
6 MARcH 2019 12:12 PM | SIZE: 297MM X 210MM | BLEED: 3MM | PUBLICATION: FAST MAGAZINE | CODE: X
CUTTER LASER PMS
14043_AIR_Single_Aisle_297x210_FAST_Magazine_1.0
PROOF READER: DATE: PROJECT MANAGER: DATE:
POWERED BY
ACCOUNT MANAGER: DATE: CREATIVE: DATE:
FINAL APPROVAL
SIGNATURES
