E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
7
3
T
S
A
F
37
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 5
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
HUMAN FACTORS SYMPOSIUM SPARES,SUPPLIERS & WARRANTY
REGIONAL SYMPOSIUM
IN MADRID,SPAIN,28-30 NOVEMBER
IN ATHENS,13-16 FEBRUARY 2006
Airbus continued the dialogue with its operators at
Following the Airbus Spares, Suppliers and
this forum, discussing human factors aspects with
Warranty symposium in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico
practical and operational perspectives on:
for operators in the Americas, and in Sanya,
• Flight operations (environmental, safety, pure
China, for Chinese operators, it is now the turn of
ops e.g. procedures, philosophy, systems)
Europe and Africa. A Spares, Suppliers &
• Maintenance (safety, CRM, organization, proce-
Warranty regional symposium will be held in
dures, manuals)
Athens, Greece, from the 13th to the 16th of
• Cabin operations (safety, CRM, organization,
February 2006 bringing together Airbus cus-
procedures, mass travel, medical aspects)
tomers, operators and suppliers. Its objective is to
• Training (to flight operations, maintenance,
review together strategic directions, operational
cabin operations, to human factors)
support issues and current spares and warranty
• ATC (environmental, safety, pure operations e.g.
services. Operators will be given the opportunity
procedures, philosophy, systems)
to express their requirements and share their expe-
rience. Major suppliers will also have the opportu-
A300/A310 FAMILY TECHNICAL SYMPOSIUM
nity to present their support and services strategy.
IN LISBON,PORTUGAL,14-18 NOVEMBER
A landmark event occurred at this symposium,
A330/A340 FAMILY TECHNICAL SYMPOSIUM
with the first formal presentation to operators of
IN SUN CITY,SOUTH AFRICA,28 MAY-2 JUNE 2006
the Airbus initiatives to ensure Long Term Support Airbus is pleased to announce the date and loca-
of the A300/A310 Family. The objective of this ini- tion of the next A330/A340 Technical Symposium.
tiative is to ensure equivalent levels of operator The Symposium is the opportunity to review
satisfaction for A300/A310 operators as for any actual in-service experience with the A330/A340
other Airbus programme through to the last air- Family of aircraft as well as to discuss subjects of
craft being in-service (up to year 2050). Clearly more general technical interest.
the enhanced support foreseen for the A380 will A provisional agenda will be sent in February 2006.
set the satisfaction benchmark, and for the
A300/A310 Family other considerations that affect
the level of service include the low rate of produc-
tion (can affect spares availability) and the even-
tual closure of the final assembly line, which must
be anticipated. The operators at the symposium
expressed their view that their expectations for the
future had been met (61%) or exceeded (39%) in
this respect.
The symposium discussion otherwise covered
various technical, maintenance and support issues
and 100 participants from 36 operators were pres-
ent, including all of the largest A300/A310 opera-
tors. 67% of the operator respondents considered
the event very useful and 33% useful.
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
73TSAF
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Publisher:Bruno Piquet
Editor:Kenneth Johnson
Graphic Designer:Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Authorization for reprint of FAST articles should be requested
from the editor at the FAST e-mail address given below
Customer Services Communications
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
E-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer Escourbiac
FAST may be read on Internet
http://www.content.airbusworld.com/SITES/Customer_services/index.html
under Customer Services/Publications
ISSN 1293-5476
Airbus Customer Services
© AIRBUS S.A.S. 2005. All rights reserved
No other intellectual property rights are granted by the delivery of this Magazine than
the right to read it,for the sole purpose of information.This Magazine and its content shall
not be modified and its images shall not be reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus.
This Magazine and the material it contains shall not,in whole or in part,be sold,rented,distributed
or licensed to any third party.The information contained in this Magazine may vary over time
because of future factors that may affect the accuracy of information herein.Airbus assumes no
obligation to update any information contained in this Magazine.When additional information
is required,Airbus S.A.S.can be contacted to provide further details.Airbus,its logo and product
names are registered trademarks.Airbus S.A.S.shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and of the materials it contains,
even if Airbus S.A.S.has been advised of the likelihood of such damages
Photographs: This issue of FAST has been printed on paper
exm company: Hervé Goussé and Philippe Masclet produced without using chlorine,to reduce
Airbus France: Julie Pomery waste and help conserve natural resources.
Cover page: Julie Pomery Every little helps!
1
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 5
37
Safety initiatives in Customer Services 2
An overview of Airbus safety initiatives
Michel Trémaud
Airbus cabin air quality 7
Still the best!
Claire Nurcombe
The European Aviation Safety Agency 11
A new regulatory authority for European aviation
Claude Schmitt
Engine noise reduction programme 19
Cover:A380 MSN004 at Frankfurt airport during
Making aircraft engines better neighbours
its check exercise, see article on page 23.
Stephen Montgomery
A380 23
Airport ready
Thomas Burger
Thilo Stilp
Airbus Training Airport 28
A virtual airport for pilot training
Kheireddine Belguedj
Bernard Benetti
Countering jet fuel price increases 32
Guidance on fuel saving
Simon Weselby
Frédéric Desgeorge
Giants of the skies,past and present 36
Customer Services
Around the clock...Around the world 37
3
73
TSAF
SAFETY INITIATIVES IN CUSTOMER SERVICES - AN OVERVIEW OF AIRBUS SAFETY INITIATIVES SAFETY INITIATIVES IN CUSTOMER SERVICES - AN OVERVIEW OF AIRBUS SAFETY INITIATIVES
Continued implement safety enhancements in
terms of Design, Operations (i.e.
airworthiness and
procedures) and Training.
operational safety
Safety enhancement efforts
address equally flight operations,
Operators and Maintenance, cabin operations and mainte-
Repair and Overhaul (MRO) orga- nance. The lessons-learned
nizations are required to report to derived from this process are
their national authorities in-service blended with the conclusions and
occurrences defined by their coun- recommendations from industry
try's mandatory occurrence report- working groups in order to devel-
ing (MOR) scheme. It is essential op and publish safety-awareness
that such in-service occurrences informationin various media.
are also reported to Airbus, docu-
mented, analysed and understood Attaining and
in order to prevent the reoccur-
maintaining safe
rence of known types of eventsand
the occurrence of potential events. and profitable
Indeed, this prevention process
operations
includes both areactive partand a
proactive part.
Support to operators in attaining
For effective identification of and maintaining safe and prof-
events precursors (also referred itable operations has been the
to as weak signals), the proactive charter of Airbus Customer
part also includes the analysis of Services since the entry-into-
observations made by operators service of the first A300 aircraft
in the frame of their flight opera- back in 1975. However, the indus-
tions monitoring programme (i.e. try has greatly evolved and Airbus'
incidents and human factors initial operators base of flag carri-
reports, flight data analysis and ers has been enriched with charter
line observations). operators and, more recently, low-
cost carriers and corporate flight
The operational, technical and departments.
human factors analysis of in-
service experience feedback The leased-aircraft concept has
enables Airbus to continuously been an enabler in this market
identify lessons-learned and evolution and has created a new
Airbus Flight Operations Briefing
Notes,an example of Airbus
safety-awareness publications
3
73
TSAF
Safety initiatives
in Customer Services
An overview of Airbus
safety initiatives
As an aircraft manufacturer, the prime duty of Since 2003, Airbus Customer Services has
Airbus in terms of safety is two-fold: deployed a yearly portfolio of safety initiatives
• Ensure the continued airworthiness and that address all aspects of Airbus's internal core
operational safety of the Airbus fleet, activities and all domains of an airline's operation.
• Support Airbus operators in attaining and
maintaining a safe and profitable operation. This article provides an overview of this portfolio
of safety initiatives to encourage operators and
The former represents the manufacturer's regula- other actors to take full advantage of these safety
tory obligation, as Airbus is the holder of a design enhancement opportunities.
and production operational approval. The latter
reflects Airbus's commitment, as a customer
services organization, to operators of Airbus
aircraft.
Michel Trémaud
Senior Director
Airbus Customer Services
Head of Safety Management
2
SAFETY INITIATIVES IN CUSTOMER SERVICES - AN OVERVIEW OF AIRBUS SAFETY INITIATIVES
framework of relationships bet- .Company safety management
ween Airbus, its customers (i.e. the system (SMS),
leasing companies) and the aircraft . Fleet upgrade and
operators. The traffic growth in standardization,
fast-developing geo-economic . English proficiency training.
regions has been an additional
driver in the evolution of Airbus Safety
support to its aircraft operators.
awareness
Today, Airbus Customer Services
offers a wide range of support and Safety management is a mindset;
services to further enhance operat- safety readiness is a matter of
ing safety. This support is both awareness… being aware to be
direct (i.e., working with operators) mentally prepared. Over the past
and indirect (i.e., working with years, Airbus Customer Services
national civil aviation authorities, has developed a wide array of
training organizations, MRO cen- safety awareness publications on
tres, international safety organiza- various media:
tions…) and spans the following • 'Getting to Grips with'
basic elements of a safe operation: brochures that today cover 19
• Regulations, flight operations themes,
• Regulatory oversight by including cabin safety,
national authorities, • Flight Operations Briefing
• Operator's regulatory Notes, published on a monthly
compliance and best practices: basis in the Airbus Safety
. General organization, Library,
. Flight operations organization (http://www.airbus.com/en/
(including flight operations corporate/ethics/safety_lib/)
monitoring process), and in a yearly collector box
. Maintenance/engineering • E-Briefings,available on the
organization including Flight Operations Community
maintenance best practices, of the new airbusworld.com
spares provisioning and customer portal,
ground support (http://www.airbusworld.com/)
equipment/tools, • Videos and CDs.
5
73
TSAF
SAFETY INITIATIVES IN CUSTOMER SERVICES - AN OVERVIEW OF AIRBUS SAFETY INITIATIVES
To further ease the dissemination The above set of safety initiatives
and understanding of complex are intended for the various users
subjects by all stakeholders, some of Airbus products and their
of the above safety awareness instructors, but would not be com-
publications have been translated plete if Airbus were not involved
into the Chinese and Russian upstream in the basic education
languages. and training of future Airbus pilots,
flight attendants and maintenance
Training and mechanics. Therefore, cooperation
programmes with state technical
education
universities, flight academies and
flying colleges have been devel-
Maintaining the link with operators oped in China and North America,
after their type qualification, in one while similar programmes are cur-
of the Airbus Training centres, is an rently being developed in Russia,
important element of Airbus' safety Ukraine, India, South Africa and
awareness strategy. In 2004, Airbus Australia.
created the concept of regional
Airline Instructors Seminars to pro- The objective of these programmes
mote the continued exchange of is to provide students and cadets
teaching and safety information with early exposure to modern
between Airbus instructors and air- technology systems and flight
line instructors. The following is the decks, by providing education and
regional coverage achieved by these training organizations with:
seminars in 2004 and 2005, and • Technical documentation and
planned for 2006: safety awareness publications,
• 2004: Taipei, Mumbai, Beijing, • Courseware,
• 2005: Miami, Moscow, Hanoi, • Training devices.
• 2006: Bangalore, Tunis, Beijing,
plus locations to be selected in International
the Middle East, Asia and South
safety cooperation
America.
Acknowledging the requests of Airbus Customer Services is also
operators, the initial concept that further involved in the develop-
focused on flight operations has ment of workshops and seminars
been extended to maintenance that are deployed in the context of
from the last seminar in Hanoi. regional safety cooperation pro-
grammes funded or led by the
European Union, the International
Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) and Airbus.
5
73
TSAF
1
2
3
4
Flight Operations Briefing Notes
collector box, brochure‘Getting to Airbus Training centres in
Grips’in Chinese and Russian 1.Beijing
languages,safety-awareness tutorials 2.Hamburg
and courseware on CDs. 3.Miami
4.Toulouse
Airbus Safety Library home page
hosted on the Airbus corporate
website E-Briefings,a new interactive
safety-awareness publication
4
The scope of these workshops and • Cabin operations
seminars are defined to respond to . Cabin safety (see brochure
regional needs and priorities. ‘getting to grips with Cabin
As described below, they address a Safety’below).
large cross-section of themes
identified as causal or contributing
factors in incidents and accidents:
• Company safety management
. Incident/accident prevention,
. Safety Management System
(SMS).
• Flight operations
. Preventing Controlled Flight
Into Terrain (CFIT),
. Approach and Landing
Accident Reduction (ALAR),
. Flight operations safety
awareness (CFIT, ALAR,
runway incursions, altitude
deviations/level busts,
fire/smoke/fumes in
cockpit/cabin, weather
avoidance, …),
. Flight Operations Monitoring • Maintenance/Engineering
(FOM), . Structural integrity/
. Understanding and use of the maintenance of aging aircraft
Minimum Equipment List structures,
(MEL). . Maintenance of electrical,
wiring and interconnections,
. Maintenance human factors.
73
TSAF
SAFETY INITIATIVES IN CUSTOMER SERVICES - AN OVERVIEW OF AIRBUS SAFETY INITIATIVES AIRBUS CABIN AIR QUALITY - STILL THE BEST!
Airbus cabin
air quality
Still the best!
Frequent flyers experience it regularly, flight After carrying out air quality analyses (see
attendants and cockpit crew complain about it, but FAST 20 December 1996 'Airbus Cabin Air
up until now nothing was done about it - that Quality - Only the Best!') and discovering that air
smell coming from the exhausts of aircraft in front quality was worst during ground phases due to
of you in the taxi queue waiting to take off. The the influence of external pollution, Airbus decid-
CONTACT DETAILS major odour causing compounds in exhaust gases ed to concentrate on finding an answer to these
and fuels are from the family of compounds complaints.
Michel Trémaud known as VOCs (volatile organic compounds) and
Senior Director
they can really spoil that holiday feeling.
Airbus Customer Services
Head of Safety Management
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 30 04
Fax:+ (33) (0) 5 67 19 12 24
michel.tremaud@airbus.com
An accident investigator once said, his/her own contribution to aviation safety,
'Safety is leaving no stone unturned' but aviation safety has been built from,
to identify threats that may lie hidden on and is continuously enhanced by,
the path to safety. Safety enhancement successive building blocks. All of them -
Claire NURCOMBE
initiatives must involve a mosaic of efforts small or large - contribute to making our ECS Engineer
and cooperation programmes. safe aviation transportation system even Customised Systems
None of us will ever be able to measure safer. Airbus Deutschland
7
73
TSAF
Installation 72%
Maintenance human factors: understanding
Servicing 9%
and managing human errors
Job set-up preparation 3%
Test 2%
Human movement 2%
Removal 1%
Others 11%
Conclusion
6
Tapping points were installed In order to test the odour intensity
upstream and downstream of the and hedonic tone (the tone des-
catalyst where air samples could be cribes how pleasant the odour is),
taken (see figure above). as well as the overall perceived air
quality, test panels made up of
In a quantitive analysis the iso- members of the public were given
alkanes (a specialist term for com- questionnaires to rate how the air
pounds consisting of chains of car- smelt upstream and downstream of
bon molecules) were measured and the catalyst. The panellists had to
it could be clearly seen that the rate how strong the odour was at
longer carbon chains present different concentrations and tem-
upstream of the catalyst were being peratures, and also whether it smelt
broken down (see figure below). pleasant or not. After the overall air
This proved that the catalyst was quality was judged by the panel-
having an effect on the compounds lists they were asked to judge
within the vapour, however this whether they could smell fuel
type of analysis does not show odours in the air sample.
whether the catalyst was effective-
ly reducing odour. In addition to this human 'sniff'
testing, samples were taken for the
While the chemistry may seem GC-O analysis. For this the air
simple, the human nose is not and sample is analysed by a GC-MS
it was necessary to pursue some (gas chromatography - mass spec-
additional testing to make sure trometry) analyser with a modified
that the converter was not leading off-take. A GC-MS analysis pre-
to more odorous by-products sents the full chemical spectrum
being produced. To do this human of a sample, allowing the chemist
noses were used, as well as elec- to see which individual compounds
tronic analysers, in panel tests, are present. The GC-O analyser
and GC-O (gas chromatography - additionally allows the flavour
olfactometry) tests. chemist doing the analysis to
9
73
TSAF
AIRBUS CABIN AIR QUALITY - STILL THE BEST! AIRBUS CABIN AIR QUALITY - STILL THE BEST!
Catalyst
Fuel vapour Odourless
molecules molecules
Tapping points
Nose testing and electronic analysis.
With thanks to the Fraunhofer Institute for
Building Physics
*Cx is the number
+% Uncoated matrix of carbon atoms
present in the
carbon
chain.
Coated matrix
-%
Increasing Cx *
9
73
TSAF
Current standards with small amounts of other
Experimental set-up
compounds, such as sulphur.
Hydrocarbons are a class of com-
Ozone Converters (OZC) have pounds made up of hydrogen and
been standard equipment for air- carbon combined in molecular
craft for over 10 years and optional chains. These compounds are pre-
equipment for 20 since it was sent in very small amounts, but
found necessary to introduce due to the sensitivity of the human
ozone removal capability after the nose the cabin occupants can
first trans-Pacific flights in the smell them, even down to levels of
mid-70's. The OZC is installed as a couple of parts per trillion of the
standard equipment on A330/A340 compound.
Family aircraft and the A380, and
is increasingly being chosen as an The catalyst coating is applied to a
option for the A320 Family. It was core within the converter's body
therefore decided to investigate the and oxidizes these odorous com-
possibility of developing a new pounds, resulting in the formation
catalyst to remove both ozone and of odourless water (H2O) and car-
VOCs. Airbus suppliers rose to the bon dioxide (CO2) as reaction
challenge and developed a new cat- products (see figures below). Since
alyst to remove these odours, VOCs are present in very low con-
which could be combined with the centrations the amount of water
existing ozone removing catalyst to and carbon dioxide created by the
minimize installation costs and conversion process is small.
weight impact.
Test methods
The conversion
principle To investigate the performance of
the catalyst the VOC containing
vapours from an aircraft fuel sam-
Catalyst and core structure
The VOCs entering the bleed air ple was passed over the catalyst.
supply via the engines may come VOCs may come from many
from ground service vehicle sources, however fuel vapour was
exhausts or engine exhausts selected to provide a realistic mix
of other aircraft and mostly con- of contaminants that may be pre-
sist of hydrocarbons (HC) mixed sent in contaminated airport air.
Catalytic reaction
Percentage difference for iso-alkanes
up/down-stream of the catalyst
Hot bleed air O2
Oxygen O2
H2O
Water H2O CO2
H2O
Carbon dioxide CO2
Odorous hydrocarbons (VOCS) HC
8
73
TSAF
EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION
The European
Aviation Safety
Agency
A new regulatory authority
for European aviation
CONTACT DETAILS
The formation of the European Aviation Safety It all started in 1969, when aerospace industry
Claire NURCOMBE
Agency (EASA) was the result of a longstand- leaders, conscious of the importance of inter-
ECS Engineer
Customised Systems ing request from European industry, going national co-operation for future aeronautical
Airbus Deutschland back to 1969.EASA has now been in operation programmes, prompted AECMA, their
since October 2003, so this is an appropriate European trade association*, to submit a
Phone:+49 (0)40 743 83293
time to take both a global and a closer look at request to the main European aviation certifi-
Fax:+49 (0)40 743 73787
Conclusion this new institution, see how it is established cation authorities, asking them to cooperate
claire.nurcombe@airbus.com
and understand its role and actions in relation and adopt common airworthiness certification
to Airbus products. requirements.
Still the best! This technology will become standard
equipment for future aircraft programmes.
Airbus is the first aircraft manufacturer to With the VOZC installed, and improved
integrate this technology into their aircraft. cabin air quality on ground for crew and
The installation of the combined VOZC is passengers, airlines will soon be 'smelling'
Claude Schmitt
available as an option for the A320 and the benefits of Airbus' dedication to Senior Director Strategies & Policies
A330/A340 families and the A380. innovation. Engineering-Product Integrity
11
73
TSAF
AIRBUS CABIN AIR QUALITY - STILL THE BEST!
identify the type of odour of the ozone converter equipment, mean-
individual odorous compounds. ing minimal weight and mainte-
The flavour chemist uses his or her nance impact for operators.
trained nose to identify each odor-
ous compound and give a descrip- The combined converter has the
tion, such as 'green', 'citrus', or same maintenance requirements as
Combined VOC/Ozone Converter 'roasty' to it. These descriptions can for the ozone converter and the two
(VOZC) for A320
then be compared to the known converters are fully interchange-
odorous characteristics of chemi- able (although of course the odour
cals and the compounds that are removing function is lost if
causing the odour can be identified. exchanged for a standard ozone
A perceived air quality improve- converter).
ment of 80% and a significant
reduction in the odour intensity was The modification is optional for
confirmed during the testing. A320, A330/A340 families and the
A380, although introduction as
standard equipment for the A380 is
Entry into service
planned. The combined Ozone
/VOC Converter (VOZC) will also
The new odour removing function be standard equipment for future
is integrated into the existing Airbus programmes.
OZC and VOZC data for aircraft programmes
* The AECMA association
has now merged with
European trade
associations of space and
defence industries to form
the Aerospace and
Defence Industries
Association of Europe
(ASD).
10
13
73
TSAF
EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA)
and defines the agency's general
organization and tasks.
THE OBJECTIVES
The main objective of the Basic
Regulation is to ensure a high, uni-
form, level of safety of civil aviation
in Europe. Additional objectives, in
line with general EU objectives and
principles, have also been added,
concerning environment protection,
free circulation of products, ser-
vices and persons, improved cost-
efficiency, assistance to member
states and promotion of European
positions concerning aviation safety
rules and standards.
LEGAL COMPETENCE AND
REGULATORY POWER
The legislative level (EU Council
and Parliament), through the Basic
Regulation, defines the scope of • Verification of correct and uni-
powers being transferred to the form implementation of Basic
Community, adopts the essential Regulation and common rules
requirements specifying the objec- by member states
tives to be met, allocates the exec-
utive tasks among the executive The decision and plan to transfer
actors, and establishes the means the responsibility on rules govern-
of judicial control. At the executive ing aircraft operations and qualifi-
level, standards necessary for the cation of relevant personnel is
implementation of the Basic Regu- already stipulated in the Basic
lation may be adopted by either Regulation, while provision is
the European Commission (imple- made for the subsequent transfer of
menting rules) or by EASA (certi- rules concerning safety of air traf-
fication specifications, acceptable fic control and airports (a new EU
means of compliance). See Parliament and Council decision is
‘General scheme’. necessary in this case).
THE TRANSFER OF
EASA functions
LEGAL COMPETENCE
Since 28 September 2003, legal EASA is in charge of drafting all
competence and power have been future regulations relative to avia-
transferred from member states to tion safety (for adoption by EASA
the EU for: itself or for submission to European
• Rules governing the Commission orParliament/Council)
airworthiness of aircraft and and is responsible for compliance
related products (type design, verification tasks associated with
continued airworthiness, some of these regulations.
maintenance organizations and
personnel) The agency is also responsible for
• Compliance determination for the coordination of research on avi-
aircraft product designs and ation safety and assists the
issuance of relevant type European Commission on a num-
certificates ber of aspects, including the
13
73
TSAF
The authorities responded very European aviation safety require-
What will EASA do
positively and created in 1970 ments (no national differences or
what would subsequently be called variants), and for a single process
the Joint Aviation Authorities to obtain, from one authority only,
(JAA), developing harmonized certificates and approvals having
technical requirements (the Joint full validity throughout Europe.
Aviation Requirements - ‘JARs’)
with the support and contribution A number of solutions were
General scheme of industry expertise. explored and many milestones
passed before the governments of
the European Union (EU), in
March 2000, finally instructed the
European Commission to negotiate
the establishment of a new EU
agency that could provide the
effective, recognized, single
authority requested by the various
stakeholders concerned with avia-
tion safety regulation.
This process was finally completed
with the adoption, on 15 July 2002,
of the regulation ‘on common rules
in the field of civil aviation and
establishing a European Aviation
Safety Agency’(referred to as the
‘Basic Regulation’ in the follow-
ing) by the EU Council and
Parliament.* What will EASA not do
* Regulation (EC) N°1592/2002 of the European However, despite the successive
Parliament and of the Council,on common rules in the scope extensions (maintenance, The Basic
field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation operations, licences) and proce-
Safety Agency (15 July 2002). Regulation and
dural improvements brought into
the JAA system, it could not be the European
legally empowered to fulfil the
institutional context
requests for a single set of binding
Responsibility splitting between EASA and NAAs Within the framework of existing
EU treaties and institutions,
the Basic Regula-
tion is setting up the
organization of
Community compe-
tence for aviation
safety. It constitutes
a ‘European Avia-
tion Safety Act’,
which sets funda-
mental objectives,
establishes and
organizes the exer-
cise (and, if neces-
sary, the transfer) of
legal competence
and regulatory pow-
ers on aviation safe-
ty matters in the
EU. Finally, it estab-
lishes the European
12
15
73
TSAF
EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION
any airworthiness directive affect-
ing a product and any design orga-
nization approval or change thereof
are now approved under the direct
responsibility of the agency.
During the transition phase, until
the agency has built up sufficient
in-house resources and expertise to
carry out these tasks entirely on its
own, EASA will rely on the NAAs
which will provide assistance to
ensure the continuity of certifica-
tion tasks during the establishment
phase of EASA. EASA and the
NAAs are accordingly negotiating
contractual outsourcing arrange-
ments for this purpose.
EASA has joined the JAA organiza-
tion as a member and will represent
EU member states in the JAA sys-
tem, which is still developing oper-
ations and crew licensing rules
(pending taking over of these
aspects by EASA). JAA member
states will accept EASA certifica-
tions and adopt the same require-
ments, to avoid any duplication or
divergence. A contract between the
two organizations also allows
EASA to rely on the expertise and
experience of the JAA central office
for a number of regulatory tasks.
The funding
of EASA
The Basic Regulation stipulates
that EASA’s budget will be funded
by resources provided by a contri-
bution from the EU and by charges
levied from applicants to cover the
costs related to its certification and
oversight tasks.
The EASA fees and charges sys- charging systems in each of the
tem is the subject of a specific reg- member states (from free of charge
ulation, which has been adopted by to full cost recovery from appli-
the European Commission. In cants). An agreement has therefore
doing so, the Commission has been been reached with the advisory
faced with the difficulty of evaluat- board that the EASA fee structure
ing the future workload involved and levels will be reconsidered
for a number of tasks, and with the annually during the first 4 years.
impossibility of making credible This will be done against the
comparisons with the previous results of a detailed analytical
situation characterized by com- accounting system, to examine
pletely different cost recovery and the balance between tasks and
15
73
TSAF
inspections to be conducted in the composed of all professions con-
EASA organization,the main factors
member states to check the uni- cerned - the advisory board, has
form implementation of the regula- been established and is being con-
tions in Europe. Some of the tasks sulted regularly by the manage-
related to the implementation of ment board prior to decisions
regulations remain with National affecting interested parties. The
Aviation Administrations (NAAs), advisory board may also formulate
which requires a sharing of respon- positions, requests or proposals on
sibilities between the agency and its own initiative.
these administrations. A summary
of what the agency will or will not While recourse to the EU Court of
do and the sharing of responsibili- Justice always remains possible in
ties is provided on pages 12 and 13. case of disagreement with an
EASA decision, a board of appeal
The structure is established as a built-in appeal
process, which provides for a faster
and organization
resolution of disputes by indepen-
of EASA dent experts.
EASA is controlled by a manage- The EASA executive director was
ment board, which comprises repre- recruited in September 2003 by the
sentatives from each of the 25 EU management board, which also EASA organization chart
member states, from the European endorsed the nominations of the
Commission and from observers four directors heading the agency's
(non EU member states having main functions (certification, rule-
negotiated agreements with the EU). making, quality & standardization
See EASA membership figure. and administrative) on his proposal.
EASA is currently pursuing a
In accordance with the Basic recruitment and staffing campaign
EASA membership Regulation, a consultative body for its four directorates, and it is
expected that, after having reached
a level of around 100 staff at the end
of 2004, the agency will expand its
resources to around 200 staff by the
end of 2005. The agency's final
level of staffing should be reached
at the end of 2006 (assumed to be
approximately 300 persons).
The EASA headquarters moved to
Köln in Germany in November
2004 and the agency's organization
and structure are summarized in
the figure on the right.
Transition and
relations between
former JAA/NAAs
system and EASA
EASA has taken over member
States responsibility for issuing
certificates for aeronautical
products and organizations. This
means that since 28 September
2003, any product design, any
modification or repair to a product,
14
17
73
TSAF
EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION
revenues, confirm or correct Regulations No. 1702/2003 and
assumptions made, and adjust the 2042/2003 (See figure below).
level of charges for the following Commission Regulation No.
year. 1702/2003 provides, as an annex,
the Part 21 implementing rule,
The EASA fees and charges regu- dealing with the certification pro-
lation entered into force on 1 June cedures for products, parts and
2005 and transitional arrangements appliances (type certificates cover-
should be such that any double ing airworthiness, noise and emis-
charging of applicants is avoided sion requirements, approval of
as EASA moves to the new parts and appliances, individual
charging system. certificate of airworthiness, per-
mits to fly, restricted certificates)
The new European as well as related organization
approvals (design and production).
regulatory context
Similarly, Commission Regulation
To allow EASA to take over No. 2042/2003 provides, in several
responsibility from 28 Sept 2003 annexes, the implementing rules of These new regulatory parts are ‘acceptable means of compliance’
for product airworthiness and Part M (continued airworthiness of essentially based on former equiv- (‘Book 2’, equivalent to former JAR
environmental aspects, which individual aircraft), Part 145 (orga- alent JAA JARs and associated sections 2 and 3). See figures above
includes both certification and nizations involved in large and/or acceptable means of compliance and right.
maintenance (continuing airwor- commercially operated aircraft), and guidance material, with the
thiness) aspects, the prior adop- Part 66 (aircraft maintenance exception of Part M (which has no An important difference from the
tion of relevant implementing licence for staff allowed to issue former equivalent JAR, as these former JAA system is that member
rules by the Commission was certificates of release to service), aspects were addressed by indi- states may no more deviate from
necessary: this was achieved with and Part 147 (maintenance training vidual member states and not by common rules, impose additional
the adoption of Commission organizations). JAA). While the same paragraph requirements, nor conclude arran-
numbering system is retained, gements with third countries.
slightly different numbering is
visible in the new parts, which EASA working
contain not only the applicable
procedures
technical requirements (Section
A) but also the procedures to be
applied by NAAs (Section B) in The EASA Management Board has
cases where they are in charge of adopted general principles that will
implementing the relevant rules in govern the agency activities con-
their territory (examples of Parts cerning rulemaking and certifica-
21 and 145 numbering compared tion of products and organizations.
to former JAR rules are shown Detailed procedures, in line with
above. these principles, have been, or will
soon be, developed by the agency
Each of the above-mentioned EC itself for both rulemaking and cer-
regulations also contains, for each tification activities.
of the relevant parts, the modalities
by which former certificates and For rulemaking activities, EASA is
approvals, issued by NAAs in assisted by the Safety Standards
accordance with former JAA or Consultative Committee (SSCC,
national requirements and proce- representatives of interested par-
dures, are automatically ‘grandfa- ties) and the Advisory Group of
thered’and transferred into EASA National Authorities (AGNA, the
certificates and approvals. representatives of NAAs) for the
determination of rulemaking pri-
For product certification require- orities and work programmes, and
ments EASA has adopted the more generally the implementa-
‘Certifications Specifications’(CS) tion of rulemaking activities.
composed of the applicable ‘airwor- ‘Drafting groups’ may be called
thiness code’(‘Book 1’, equivalent to prepare proposed texts, and in
to former JAR section 1) and any case, a public consultation
17
73
TSAF
IR 21 architecture IR 145 architecture
Rulemaking in EASA context
Certification specifications
Basic Regulation Annex I : Essential Requirements for Airworthiness Agency
Regulation (EC) 1592/2002 of 15 July 2002 Annex II : Excluded Aircraft Opinion
Regulation (EC) 1702/2003 on Airworthiness Regulation (EC) 2042/2003 Agency
and Environmental Certification on Continuing Airworthiness Opinion
Annex (Part 21) Section A: application requirements Annex I (Part-M): Section A: application requirements
Section B: administrative procedures Continuing Airworthiness Section B: administrative procedures
Requirements
Appendices: EASA forms Appendices: EASA forms
Annex II (Part-145):
Parliament and Council
Maintenance Organization Approvals
European Commission
Annex III (Part-66):
Certifying Staff
EASA
Annex IV (Part-147):
Training Organization Requirements
Guidance Material Certification AMC & Guidance Material Agency
Specifications
CS, AMC & GM Part 21 Part M, 145,66,147
AMC 20 CS AWO CS 22
AMC 21 CS ETSO CS 23
CS 25 CS Definitions CS 27
CS 34 CS 29
CS 36 CS VLA
CS E CS VLR
CS P
CS APU
16
73
TSAF
EASA - A NEW REGULATORY AUTHORITY FOR EUROPEAN AVIATION ENGINE NOISE REDUCTION PROGRAMME -MAKING AIRCRAFT ENGINES BETTER NEIGHBOURS
process is to be followed (NPA: International
Notice of Proposed Amendment).
relations, bilateral
Similarly, detailed certification
procedures for both products and agreements
organizations have been prepared
and published by the agency. Interested parties have requested
that every step of EASA establish-
Finalization ment be carefully made so as not to
disturb the validation of European
of transition
certifications and approvals by for-
and achievement eign, non-European, authorities
and the international exchange of
of remaining
aeronautical products and services.
EASA objectives In particular, industry has insisted
on the necessity for the European
Community to conclude appropri-
Naturally, industry is carefully ate bilateral agreements with for-
watching the establishment phase eign countries, in particular with
of EASA and the transition from the USA. Negotiations are pro-
the former JAA/NAAs system, gressing between the European
with particular attention paid to Commission, EASA and a number
the necessity of maintaining the of foreign authorities, and working
availability of the necessary arrangements are already agreed
authority expertise during and with a number of them.
after this build-up phase. This
requires careful management of a No significant difficulties have
pool of sharable expertise, with been noted so far in the interna-
appropriate sharing of this tional exchange of products and
resource with national authorities, services, probably owing to the
during the whole transition phase, fact that it has generally been
until the agency is in a position to agreed that existing bilateral agree-
fulfil its responsibility and con- ments will remain valid as long as
duct all tasks with its own necessary until replaced by new
resources. agreements with the EU/EASA.
Not long after the creation of the first regular timeframes where aircraft could not land or
air service between London and Paris, the res- take-off. These types of restrictions are still in
idents of both cities started complaining about place today, both in London and Paris, as well
aircraft noise. The arrival of the jet age exacer- as most other airports around the world. The
bated the problem, Parisians and Londoners newer types of restrictions have become more
living under the flight paths took their cases to complex, with different restrictions and land-
higher governmental bodies. The result was ing fees enforced depending on the certified
the introduction of operational restrictions and noise level of an aircraft.
Stephen Montgomery
Technical Manager
Engineering Centre of Competence Powerplant
19
73
TSAF
Engine noise
reduction programme
Making aircraft engines
better neighbours
CONTACT DETAILS
Claude Schmitt
Senior Director
Strategies & Policies
Engineering-Product Integrity
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 82 57
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 42 71
Conclusion claude.schmitt@airbus.com
In line with the longstanding European accompanying the restructuring of the
industry principle of maintaining one level European aerospace industry.
of safety for air transport throughout
Europe, the establishment of EASA is Airbus and the whole European industry
considered by industry to be the logical are placing great hopes in EASA, which
final step to pursue the achievement they consider potentially to become the
reached by the former JAA system and best aviation safety system for Europe
transform it into a more coherent and and a model for the world, as well as an
efficient system, applying the principles of efficient partner of their future
European Community treaties and development.
18
21
73
TSAF
ENGINE NOISE REDUCTION PROGRAMME -MAKING AIRCRAFT ENGINES BETTER NEIGHBOURS ENGINE NOISE REDUCTION PROGRAMME -MAKING AIRCRAFT ENGINES BETTER NEIGHBOURS
fairings were also modified to temperature resistant material. The
include acoustic treatment. The idea was to utilize the current noz-
result was an increase in the zle lines as much as possible to
acoustic area of the thrust reverser ensure a new chevron nozzle could
by approximately 2 square meters be easily fitted onto existing
(21.5 sq ft). engines, without modification of
the actual engine hardware.
This increase would provide signif-
icant noise reduction, but would
Chevron nozzle
not be enough.
design challenges
Next, the specialists turned their
thoughts to the exhaust nozzle. The
CFM engine nacelle has a separate Through model testing, it became
flow short duct nacelle, which apparent that the chevrons had a
means that the bypass air and the jet small but measurable effect on
(or core air) stay separated until engine performance. This perfor-
right at the exhaust of the engine mance impact would have to be
where the two flows meet. These countered to ensure that the end
two regions of air are moving at result would be no difference in the
very different velocities, the core air operation of the aircraft, i.e. the
being at much higher temperature operation of the engine and the
and velocity than the bypass air. The basic engine reaction to control
resulting difference in energy caus- commands would not be different
es shock waves, and shear, which from the pre-chevron nozzle
result in noise. This is typically the standard. The answer was to intro-
highest noise source created by a duce a thrust compensator, which
modern high bypass jet engine. thanks to the CFM FADEC (Full
Authority Digital Engine Control)
If the core airflow is distorted and simply required a software modifi-
mixed into the bypass air there are cation and a way of identifying to
less shock waves and hence the the aircraft when a chevron nozzle
sound generated is reduced. was fitted. This is currently done
However, distorting the flow of core through a FADEC software change
air can have a significant affect on and a programmable engine data
engine behaviour, especially for plug, which has push-pull pins
performance and fuel efficiency. allowing a discrete to be set on or
Any modification in this area would off for the thrust compensator.
have to be rigorously tested for Additional verification from the
effects on engine surge margin, MCDU (Multifunctional Control
Exhaust Gas Temperature (EGT) and Display Unit) allows program-
and Specific Fuel Consumption ming on the aircraft side to tell the
(SFC) amongst others. system a chevron nozzle is fitted,
allowing a check between aircraft
Any distortion in this area there- and engine to be made. This
fore needs to be performed in a ensures that the thrust compensator
subtle manner. Studies on core logic is only applied when a
chevron nozzles had shown good chevron nozzle is fitted.
results from analysis, however
model testing would be required to The result is full interchangeability
ensure the analytical results could and mix-ability of the chevron noz-
be proven in the real world. The zle on A320 Family aircraft.
model tests could demonstrate the
effects the chevrons would have on Another of the design challenges
performance, but were subject to was durability. The introduction of
the usual scatter associated to the chevrons meant that there were
model testing. The existing nozzle now ‘petals’of material in the hot
on the CFM56 engine is a two- air stream, which are subjected to
piece construction made from high high thermal stresses as well as high
21
73
TSAF
Modern jets are much quieter than an A322 or A317 aircraft to be cer-
those first jet aircraft, thanks to tified after 2006, and not to current
increasing technology in both aircraft.
engine design, with higher by-pass
ratios and better internal aerody- During initial discussion by the
namics, combined with improved ICAO council (where Airbus was
nacelle design, increased sound represented), it was clear to Airbus
absorption and flow mixers. and CFM that Stage 4 would quick-
ly become the reference standard
Nevertheless, Airbus, in associa- by which all aircraft are measured.
tion with the major engine and Therefore, even before the noise
nacelle manufacturers, constantly reduction target was known, Airbus
strives to reduce aircraft noise to and CFM launched initial design
Take-off and landing/certification conditions meet the requirements of both the studies targeted to be introduced on
public and the environmental the current A321 aircraft powered
authorities. by CFM engines. This would allow
reduction of A320 Family noise
levels to whatever the Stage 4 noise
requirements would be.
ICAO annex 16 certification
Take-off and landing profiles
Airbus and CFM, along with
nacelle manufacturer Goodrich
Aerostructures Group (GAG),
started investigating ways to
reduce the noise signature of the
engine. The particular concern was
for the A321 aircraft at the highest
MTOW (Maximum Take Off
Weight), as the other members of
the A320 Family already had a very
good margin over Stage 3.
Nevertheless, it was clear that all
modifications would have to be
interchangeable across the entire
Airbus A320 Family fleet to ensure
part interchangeability and mix-
ability was maintained.
Noise is measured as the level of
Thrust reverser increased acoustic area
acoustic pressure variations (SPL:
Sound Pressure Level) and its unit Where to look?
is the dB (decibel). In certification,
to take into account the duration
effect of an aircraft flyover and the Two major areas of improvements
presence of audible pure tones or in acoustics were identified, these
discrete frequencies in the noise were both associated with the
signal, aeronautics uses the EPNL exhaust or jet noise of the engine.
(Effective Perceived Noise Level),
expressed in EPNdB. The thrust reverser structure was
acoustically treated along approxi-
Increasing pressure from the public mately half of its internal surface.
and governing bodies resulted in It was clear that increasing this
the ICAO (International Civil acoustic area would increase the
Aviation Organization) declaring a acoustic sound absorption and
new noise regulation – Stage 4. hence decrease the overall measur-
able exhaust noise. The inner fixed
Stage 4 requirements only apply to structure was redesigned with
new or derivative aircraft, for increased acoustic area. In addi-
example, if Airbus were to develop tion, the support struts and several
20
73
TSAF
ENGINE NOISE REDUCTION PROGRAMME -MAKING AIRCRAFT ENGINES BETTER NEIGHBOURS A380 - AIRPORT READY
A380
Airport ready
With the entry into service of the A380 less after the A340-600 visited to do the same
than a year away, preparations by the lead air- before its entry into service. It was no coinci-
lines and airports to receive the aircraft are in dence however that the A380 arrived, was han-
full swing. The coming months will see the dled and departed using almost the same infra-
culmination of many years of collaboration structure, procedures and equipment that the
between Airbus and the airport community, A340 did four years earlier.
all focused on ensuring a smooth entry into
service. Many aspects of the A380 design have been
driven by airport compatibility considerations,
To ensure that Airbus customers receive a reli- thus minimizing the amount of adaptation, and
able, mature aircraft with the capability to fit hence investment, required by airports to
seamlessly into their existing ground opera- accommodate the aircraft. The main aim of
tions environment, early dialogue with all this design optimization was to ensure that the
stakeholders involved in airport operations A380 could be handled in the most part just
was essential. This has been recognised on all like any other widebody aircraft. It was this
Airbus aircraft programmes, and for the A380, capability that was validated by the tests at
the extensive consultation is now paying divi- Frankfurt, which consisted of both an airside
dends. On 29 October, at 08:56, A380 and landside element. The following describes,
MSN004 touched down at Frankfurt Airport to with figures from the tests, the process of han-
perform the first of a series of airport check dling the A380 and its similarities with other
exercises, coincidentally 4 years to the day widebody aircraft.
Thomas Burger Thilo Stilp
Product Marketing Manager Group Manager
A380 Product Marketing Ground Operations & Environment
A380 Programme
23
73
TSAF
aerodynamic loads. The structure For a new certification of aircraft
would have to be designed to ensure noise, there are certain weather
full life. Extensive testing both on characteristics, which must be
an engine in a test cell, as well as adhered to. There is a narrow band
fully instrumented flight testing, of climatic conditions, which
allowed GAG to correlate a detailed means flight testing can only be
finite element model of the chevron performed at certain times of the
nozzle. This model was then used year, to be certain of catching these
Chevron nozzle thermal & stress analysis to demonstrate full life capability at weather conditions.
all the extremes of the operating
envelope of the aircraft. A production A321 was used for
acoustic certification flights at an
The test airport specially selected for its
ideal weather conditions, which
increased the chances of having
During their development, the ‘good’weather.
actual noise reductions resulting
from the improvements could only The flight test provided good
be estimated. The flight effects, results with the high weight A321
particularly for the chevron noz- having an 11.2 EPNdB noise
zle, could not be fully represented reduction compared to Stage 3,
by model analysis. Therefore, the which is 1.2EPNdB below the
true result would come only from Stage 4 requirements.
flying the aircraft in the correct
configuration in front of the
airworthiness authorities.
CONTACT DETAILS
Stephen Montgomery
Technical Manager
Engineering
Centre of Competence
Powerplant
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 00 03 00
Conclusion Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 49 08
stephen.montgomery@airbus.com
The Airbus and CFM view at the time was aircraft with this modification package are
correct; Stage 4 has now become the easily identified as having associated lower
reference standard to which all aircraft are noise characteristics and therefore being
measured. With the application of the more environmentally friendly.
noise reduction programme the A321 can
join its A320 Family stable-mates in being The acoustic benefits for the other A320
the quietest aircraft in service today. Family members will be less than for the
A321, but would be able to be certified
The noise reduction package is currently upon airline request - for airlines
offered as the basic standard on all CFM interested in achieving even more margin
powered Airbus A321 aircraft. It is also to Stage 4. This may be particularly
optional on all the other A320 Family interesting in the future if individual
aircraft. airports in highly populated city areas
introduce penalties and landing
Due to the easily distinguished profile of surcharges based on noise levels even
the chevron nozzle, those airlines operating more stringent than Stage 4.
22
25
73
TSAF
A380 - AIRPORT READY A380 - AIRPORT READY
dling tests could begin. Several
ramp scenarios were simulated,
based around the standard layout
with upper deck catering, shown
on the right. Other equipment, not
normally part of the normal turn
round process was also tested as
well as multiple pieces from dif-
ferent manufacturers. In total
around 40 different pieces of GSE
(Ground Support Equipment)
were used, this compares to
around 21 for a standard A380
turn round, a similar number to
existing large aircraft.
The first process to take place was
the positioning of the passenger
boarding bridges. Stand E9 is
equipped with two boarding
bridges, with the second able to
reach the 8m (26.2ft) doorsill
height of the upper deck.
Although not an operational
necessity, many airports are plan-
ning some form of upper deck
access to enhance product differ-
entiation and passenger service
levels. Docking took place at main
deck door M1L (main deck for-
ward left door) followed by upper
deck door U1L (upper deck for-
ward left door), shown on the
right. The main deck bridge was
then moved to main deck door
M2L. The docking process went
smoothly with the desired clear-
ances achieved, although the
upper deck bridge canopy was not
fully flush with the fuselage of the
aircraft, a small case which a
minor adjustment of the canopy
rigging will solve.
Since MSN004 does not have a
passenger cabin (it is equipped
with a full flight test installation),
boarding was restricted to the
flight test crew. Full scale, timed,
turn round tests including passen-
ger boarding and cargo handling
will be conducted during the route
proving flights due to take place in
mid 2006. These tests will validate
that, due its superior cabin archi-
tecture, the A380 will offer similar
boarding and turn round times to
existing aircraft using two main
deck bridges.
25
73
TSAF
Airside current and future international
A380 side profile comparison
guidelines. In comparative terms it
compatibility
will generate half the noise energy
of today’s largest aircraft and at the
The airside element saw the air- same time carry 35% more passen-
craft arrive at a landing weight of gers per movement.
382 tonnes, just 4 tonnes below the
maximum. It then taxied direct to Landside
stand E9 at terminal 2 where
compatibility
ground tests were carried out until
19:00, these are described in the
following sections. The next day STANDS
Baseline layout with upper deck catering
the aircraft departed at 09:34 at a
take-off weight of 400 tonnes. The landside element started as
the aircraft approached stand E9,
With a lower approach speed, bet- shown on the left, one of eventual-
ter take-off, landing and climb per- ly 18 A380 capable stands at the
formance than today’s largest air- airport. With a mezzanine cockpit
craft, the A380 completed the air- between its main and upper decks
side elements of the check success- the A380 reference pilot eye
fully, and performed in much the height is 7.2m (23.6ft), between
same way as any other widebody that of the 747-400 at 8.7m
aircraft operating into Frankfurt (28.5ft) and other widebodies at
that day. Similarly, due to better about 6m (19.7ft). This allows
ground manoeuvrability and pave- good forward visibility as well as
ment loading than aircraft such as compatibility with existing stand
the A340-600 and B777-300ER, guidance systems, as was the case
A380 docked at Frankfurt,stand E9,Terminal 2 no problems were encountered dur- at Frankfurt.
ing the taxi to the stand.
At a width of 80m (262.5ft), stand
E9 is an ICAO (International Civil
Aviation Organization) Code F
stand, capable of accommodating
any aircraft up to a maximum
wingspan of 80m. Many of the
more than 60 airports that will see
Bridges docked at doors M1L and U1L
A380 operations by 2010 are tak-
ing advantage of the fact that
Code F stands can have a MARS
(Multi Aircraft Ramp uSage)
capability. This capability allows
two single-aisle aircraft to be
parked in the same space as an
A380. As terminal stands are used
by many different sizes of aircraft
during any given period, MARS
stands allow airports to optimize
gate usage and terminal efficien-
cy. The A380 can also be accom-
modated at 65m (213.3ft) wide
Code E stands if the size of air-
Many of those watching the air- craft on adjacent stands is limited
craft arrive and depart noted how to that of smaller widebodies.
quiet it was. The A380 is the first
aircraft to be designed, and guaran- RAMP OVERVIEW
teed, to meet very stringent local AND BRIDGE DOCKING
noise limits (London QC2 depar-
ture, QC1 arrival) and consequent- When the aircraft came to a stop
ly also has significant margins to and was chocked, the ground han-
24
A380 - AIRPORT READY
27
73
TSAF
A380 - AIRPORT READY
right) where cross-aisle galleys are
generally located, to allow trans-
port of catering trolleys from the
aircraft main deck to the upper
deck. Servicing of the aircraft via
the main deck only is therefore
possible. So why direct upper deck
catering? The answer is time. With
almost all airlines having their
largest galley blocks at the M2 and
U1 door cross-aisle galley posi-
tions, the ability to access both
directly, therefore avoiding the use
of the trolley lift, can save up to 36
minutes. As catering is in the criti-
cal turn around path, the overall
turn around time is also reduced by The fact that nine vehicle manufac- One of three upper deck catering
36 minutes (assuming a standard turers have announced the avail- vehicles tested at Frankfurt
555 seat cabin layout - this time ability of prototype vehicles before
could vary depending on the airline entry into service (three of which
layouts and galley locations). With were tested at Frankfurt) is again
two standard passenger boarding testament to the cooperation
bridges to the main deck of the air- between Airbus, the airlines, cater-
craft, the use of upper deck cater- ers, and vehicle manufacturers.
ing at door U1R allows the A380 to The upper deck catering working
achieve a turn around time of 90 group, organized by Airbus, was
CONTACT DETAILS
minutes, comparable to today’s successfully concluded in the sum-
largest aircraft, though with 35% mer of 2005 after eight meetings.
Thomas Burger
more passengers boarded. During these meetings different Product Marketing Manager
concepts were analysed and basic Airbus Marketing Division
Other doors on the aircraft upper functional requirements were Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 84 73
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 31 01
deck could also be considered for defined. IATA has also developed a
thomas.burger@airbus.com
direct servicing but the galley loca- dedicatedAirport Handling Manual
tions and sizes of most A380 cus- standard (926) in its 2005 issue. A Thilo Stilp
tomer airlines are such that servicing new ISO standard on upper deck Group Manager
them would not provide as big a ben- catering vehicles is also under Ground Operations & Environment
A380 Programme
efit as it does for the U1 position. development.
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 06 33
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 86
thilo.stilp@airbus.com
Conclusion
The Frankfurt airport check exercise through a more general ground handling
represented the culmination of many years working group. This will ensure that all
of cooperation between Airbus and the relevant information is passed to those
airport community on the design of the who will shortly be regularly servicing the
A380. It also signalled the readiness of aircraft. The route proving campaign will
airports to accept the aircraft using mainly then be the final validation of the airport
existing infrastructure and equipment, optimized design of the A380, providing
thus validating a design goal set from the Airbus, customer airlines, airports and
start of the programme. In the coming ground handlers with the knowledge
months Airbus contact with the ground and experience to ensure a smooth entry
handling community will continue in into service.
conjunction with customer airlines
27
73
TSAF
GROUND AND CABIN SERVICING – more wheels to spread its weight) it
ONLY TWO NEW GSE PIECES does necessitate heavier and more
REQUIRED FOR A380 SERVICING powerful tow tractors. This is espe-
cially the case if push back at MRW
Following the successful docking and under low traction conditions is
of the bridges, the positioning and to be achieved.
Most A380 servicing uses
standard existing equipment connection of the ground servicing
equipment could commence. With Both conventional (towbar) and
main and lower deck doors as well towbarless A380 capable trac-
as ground service connection tors are available from several
points at the same height as those manufacturers. The require-
of existing large aircraft, the A380 ments for these vehicles have
is serviced using mostly existing been defined in Airbus orga-
ground servicing equipment and nized working groups in which
processes. Of the 21 pieces of airlines, GSE manufacturers and
equipment that are required to ser- ground handlers were involved.
vice the aircraft, 19 are standard Today eight manufacturers are
widebody units, which can be offering A380 capable tractors
found on any airport ramp today. with several already in service.
As with any other aircraft, it is
recommended to check the equip- Conventional A380 capable units
ment manufacturers specification weigh around 70 tonnes and have
against the aircraft requirements engines with around 300hp, which
to ensure compatibility of a certain allow them to handle the A380 at
piece of GSE. A380 requirements MRW and under poor surface fric-
can be found in the Aircraft tion conditions. At weights below
Characteristics for Airplane Plan- MRW and/or with good surface
ning (AC) document, available on friction, it is also possible to use
the Airbus website (link at the end existing widebody tractor units. As
of this article). for all other aircraft, the A380
requires its own dedicated towbar.
The two A380 specific units are an
upper deck catering vehicle, which Existing towbarless tractors can-
allows direct access to the large not handle the A380 due to its
upper deck galley in order to larger nose wheel size; therefore
enhance catering times, and due to new models have been designed
the aircrafts higher ramp weight, a and are today available from five
more powerful tow tractor. These manufacturers. These new designs
Getting ready for push back units are compatible with existing were again defined during the
widebody aircraft, this being a working group meetings. Due to
clear requirement from the airlines the direct interface between these
and handlers that helped define tractors and the aircraft nose land-
them in regular Airbus organized ing gear these units need to be
working group meetings. They are qualified prior to being used on
available from several manufactur- the A380 on a regular basis. The
ers, some of who provided vehicles towbarless tractor qualification
for the Frankfurt tests. procedure is a standard practice
today for all Airbus and other man-
A380 CAPABLE TOW TRACTORS ufacturers aircraft and ensures that
the pushback and towing manoeu-
Carrying 555 passengers up to vres will not adversely affect the
8,000nm means that the A380 has a nose landing gear life cycle.
higher MTOW and consequently
MRW (Maximum Take-Off Weight UPPER DECK CATERING
and Maximum Ramp Weight) than
today’s largest aircraft. Although As a standard, the A380 is
this extra weight does not result in equipped with trolley lifts at the Link to A380 Airplane Characteristics for Airtport Planning:
higher pavement loading than exist- M2 and M5 doors (second and http://www.airbus.com/store/mm_repository/pdf/att00004248/media_object_file_AC_A380.pdf
ing widebody aircraft (the A380 has fifth main deck doors left and
26
29
73
TSAF
AIRBUS TRAINING AIRPORT - A VIRTUAL AIRPORT FOR PILOT TRAINING AIRBUS TRAINING AIRPORT - A VIRTUAL AIRPORT FOR PILOT TRAINING
The ability to offer a wider range of necessitated diverting the course
experience, such as ‘black hole’ of the river Loire!
approaches, or airports in line with
a pilot’s future operating environ- Fortunately, as this is a virtual
ment in different parts of the world airport and consequently a virtual
is the ideal for pilot familiarization, river diversion the real residents
but is not feasible in this situation. of the new river course did not
Considering these issues, and with a get wet!
vision of what an ideal system
should be like, Airbus training has For performance limitations:
developed and introduced an innov- GPWS (Ground Proximity Warning
ative tool for pilot training. This is System) training and ILS (Instrument
the Airbus Training Airport - a vir- Landing System) approaches with
tual airport - that is used in the a 4°glide slope a hill was introduced
M/FTD (Maintenance/Flight Train- in line with the new runway. Urban
ing Device) and in the Full Flight areas were also included for noise
Simulator for the new Airbus Pilot abatement restrictions.
Transition (APT) courses. Its objec-
tive is to provide functionalities to The design of taxiways and ground
enable pilot training on most types markings was done with experts
of approaches, runways, signboards from the French Civil Aviation
and ground markings etc that they Authorities in compliance with
will encounter worldwide. ICAO (International Civil Aviation
Organization) annex 14 as well as
This article describes the six steps French regulations. Particular
it took to achieve the Airbus attention was paid to ground mark-
Training Airport: airport site, plat- ings due to the taxi training recom-
form, terminal buildings and mended by the FAA (Federal
facilities, charts, FMGS (Flight Aviation Administration) in Advi-
Management Guidance System) sory Circular 120-74.
database and visual scene.
The platform has three runways
Airport site of different lengths and widths
and an additional one under
construction. All have several
The airport position is: 46 24.
approach lighting systems (PAPI,
4N/004 01.3E. The reason for this
APAPI, PAPI L, PAPI R, VASI*).
choice is the presence of a flying
A LDIN (Lead-in Light System)
school that has available runway
approach is also available with a
and radio aids. In addition, it is
final turn over water as a lake was
close to the centre of France, thus it
added to enable this.
is possible to fly a one-hour leg to
the major airports of the neigh-
The airport will be available in
bourhood.
2007 in Jeppesen ANS (Airport
Navigation System). In addition,
Platform
the software makes it possible to
reproduce airport traffic moving
The airport platform was designed on the ground so training exercises,
to provide the functionalities to in particular with low visibility, are
train pilots on most of the types of achievable. One of the most diffi-
runways, signboards, ground cult parts of a flight in some con- * ABBREVIATIONS
markings and so on. To achieve gested airports is the taxi from the PAPI:Precision Approach Path Indicator
this, it was designed according to gate to the holding point and from L:left - R:right
the airport on the selected site. the runway to the gate. This is sig- APAPI:Abbreviated Precision Approach Path Indicator
However, this did not offer all the nificantly eased when the airport is VASI:Visual Approach Slope Indicator
possibilities needed, so it was nec- equipped with the SMGCS
essary to add a new runway at 90° (Surface Movement Guidance
to the existing one to allow partic- Control System) and the airport
ular circling approaches, which also has this possibility.
29
73
TSAF
Airbus
Training Airport
A virtual airport for pilot training
To complete a pilot type-rating course and issue an Flying to several airports gives some experience of
adequate certificate Airbus training centre different runways, lighting systems, taxiways and
includes in its curriculum a number of instrument parking, but the possibility to experience a wider
and visual approaches, as required by airworthi- range of these is limited by the facilities of the air-
ness authorities. To perform these it has become ports themselves. Furthermore, flying to these air-
necessary to fly to several different airports ports requires the maintenance of a substantial
because Toulouse Blagnac airport does not have amount of airport charts, performance tables and
the capacity to handle all the approaches. visual scenes, which is time consuming, quite
expensive and inconvenient for all involved.
Captain Kheireddine Belguedj Bernard Benetti
Flight instructor pilot CAA/TRI.TRE Aircraft Simulation Expert
Training policy Training Devices Simulation & Maintenance
Training and Flight Operations Support & Services Training and Flight Operations Support & Services
Airbus Customer Services Airbus Customer Services
28
AIRBUS TRAINING AIRPORT - A VIRTUAL AIRPORT FOR PILOT TRAINING
31
73
TSAF
AIRBUS TRAINING AIRPORT - A VIRTUAL AIRPORT FOR PILOT TRAINING
Visual scene This was achieved by day, as well as by
night, in all kinds of weather conditions
such as nice weather, fog and snow.
For training tools like flight training When the runway is wet or contaminated
devices or full flight simulators the visual with ice, snow, or slush, the visual
scene is of paramount importance, as its system reflects the runway surface and
level of reliability and visual quality has degraded braking action is reproduced.
a direct impact on the level of training.
Pilots in some regions of the world may
The design of the airport visual scene have to land at night with only the
started with a two-dimensional model runway lights as a reference, which is a
drawing followed by building from this so-called ‘black hole approach’. Such
a three-dimensional model using appro- an approach can be simulated with the
priate software. The model data was airport by switching off all the lighting
then translated by another software into of the environment of the visual scene
data to be processed by the simulator except the lights of the landing runway.
image generator. The airport is available
for a number of visual systems of CONTACT DETAILS
differentmanufacturers.
Captain Kheireddine Belguedj
Flight instructor pilot CAA/TRI.TRE - Training policy - Training and
Particular attention was paid to details Flight Operations Support & Services - Airbus Customer Services
to obtain high definition of the close Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 71 - Fax:+33 (0)5 62 11 07 40
kheireddine.belguedj@airbus.com
environment of the airport.
Bernard Benetti
Aircraft Simulation Expert - Training Devices Simulation &
Maintenance - Training and Flight Operations Support & Services
Airbus Customer Services
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 21 73 - Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 73
bernard.benetti@airbus.com
For ENAC contact Hervé Pradines Conclusion PANS-OPS designer and instructor
herve.pradines@enac.fr
Airbus experience in the use of the Airbus charts and performance tables), offering
Training Airport has demonstrated many benefits from a basic school to a
benefits, some examples: professional training centre.
• Training in extreme conditions (short and • Airbus Training Airport has been used
narrow runway covered with ice, blowing since October 2004 in all Airbus training
snow, crosswind and degraded braking centres and since November 2005 in the
action). It is not necessary to have a centres of Airbus partners.
Gander or Goose Bay visual scene to
practise a localiser back course approach. • The airport will evolve at the same rate
Pilots who need to fly for the first time to as development of Airbus technology and
New York (Kennedy airport) or Tokyo airport regulation amendments.
(Haneda airport) can practice an LDIN
approach on the Airbus airport before their Considering the trend of basic training for
first trip and therefore be familiar and airline pilots towards increasing simulator
comfortable with it before doing it in time and reducing real aircraft handling,
reality. an increasing part (most) of courses will
be performed on training devices and full
• The airport can be customised to flight simulators. Therefore, the Airbus
reproduce an operator’s home airport and Training Airport with its wide range of
implemented in any place in the world, so possibilities will be of great value to
can comply with an operator’s local ensure good quality pilot training and
training needs. generate increasing benefits for those
using it.
• It is flexible, adaptable and enables cost
savings (no update required for airport
31
73
TSAF
Terminal buildings Non-precision approaches like
VOR DME, ADF, localiser back
and facilities
course and even VDF
(Voice Directional Finder) are also
The airport has a main central possible.
terminal building and two side
satellites. Each is devoted to an The basic issue of the charts is in
aircraft size: the north satellite for AIP (Aeronautical Information
the A380, the central terminal for Publications) format converted to
the A330/A340 and A300 families Jeppesen format and it will be
and the south satellite for the A320 available in LIDO Flight Nav format
Family. Three different aircraft as well. These formats are alterna-
guidance systems are implemented tive versions of the charts available
at the gates. The airport has two for airports (see examples and list
control towers, a freight terminal, on the left).
a maintenance hangar and several
parking positions on the tarmac. FMGS database
A fire station is included, as well as
some administration buildings. The
service roads and antennas of radio The STARs (Standard Terminal
aids are also shown on the visual Arrival Routes), SIDs (Standard
scene. Instrument Departures), and
instrument approaches listed in the
Airport charts pilot documentation are included
in the FMGS (Flight Management
and Guidance System) database
LLiisstt ooff J Jepeppepseens ecnha crthsarts The airport charts were designed and coded according to ARINC
by ENAC (Ecole Nationale de (Aeronautical Radio, Inc) 424
STAR ATN 1C, BUZIL 1C, DJL 1C FOR RWYS 33L/R l’Aviation Civile), which is the norms. Due to the implementation
STAR DJL 1A FOR RWYS 06, 07, 15L/R, 24 STAR DJL 1B FOR RWYS 15L/R, 24 French aviation academy. With the of artificial terrain and the modifi-
airport it is possible to practise ILS cation of the environment the
STAR CFA 1D, EB 1D FOR RWYS 06, 07, 33L/R
approaches, CAT I, CAT II and EGPWS (Enhanced Ground
SID ATN 1E, ATN 1N, BUZIL 1E, BUZIL 1N, CAT III with a 3° glide slope and Proximity Warning System) data-
BUZIL 1S FOR RWYS 06, 07, 33L/R, 15L/R, 24
also a 4° glide slope on different base is modified to match the
SIDMOU 1N, MOU 1W, ONZON 1S FOR RWYS 33L/R, orientations of the same runway. surrounding terrain profile.
24, 15L/R
AIRPORT PLAN
AIRPORT LIGHT DESCRIPTION
AIRPORT PARKING PLAN
APPROACH ILS RWY 06
APPROACH ILS RWY 07
APPROACH LOC (BCK CRS) RWY 15L
APPROACH ILS RWY 33L
APPROACH ILS RWY 33R
APPROACH CAT II ILS RWY 33R
APPROACH RNAV GNSS RWY 24
APPROACH VOR DME RWY 15R
APPROACH VOR DME RWY 24
APPROACH VOR DME RWY 33L
APPROACH VOR DME RWY 33R
APPROACH NDB RWY 33R
CIRCLING APPROACH FOR RWY 15L/R
30
TITLE - SUB-TITLE
73
TSAF
32 33
73
TSAF
COUNTERING JET FUEL PRICE INCREASES - GUIDANCE ON FUEL SAVING COUNTERING JET FUEL PRICE INCREASES - GUIDANCE ON FUEL SAVING
None of the information
contained in the ‘getting to
grips’ publications is intended
to replace procedures or
recommendations contained in
the Flight Crew Operating
Manual (FCOM),but rather to
highlight the areas where
maintenance,operations and
flight crews can contribute
significantly to fuel savings.
getting to grips getting to grips
with fuel economy with the cost index
ISSUE 3 - JULY 2004 ISSUE 2 - MAY 1998
This examines the influence of In addition to navigation functions,
flight operations on fuel conserva- the Flight Management Computer
tion and provides recommenda- (FMC) carries out real-time perfor-
tions to enhance fuel economy. It mance optimization aimed at pro-
covers maximization of range for a viding best economics, not simply
given payload, the decrease of fuel in terms of fuel consumption,
uplift from high fuel cost airports but rather in terms of direct operat-
and introduces the concept of cost ing costs. This is achieved using
index (see ‘Getting to Grips with the cost index concept that helps
the cost index’on the right). fuel and time-related costs to be
balanced.
Also, it systematically reviews fuel
conservation relative to ground and Airbus has recently launched a new
flight performance, including cen- software tool called AirS@vings. It
tre of gravity position, excess is designed to provide a dynamic
weight, flight planning, auxiliary determination of the cost index
power unit operations, taxiing, under a wide variety of operational
climb, step climb, cruise, descent, criteria so that it can be accurately
holding and approach. tailored to the specifics of an air-
ATA monthly jet fuel report
line’s operation on a particular route.
33
73
TSAF
n f o r m a t i o n
Countering
jet fuel price
increases
Guidance on fuel saving
In the last two years the average cost of jet fuel The mechanisms for maximising fuel economy
has doubled as shown in the report on the right, are well understood as being aerodynamically
while competition in the airline industry is clean aircraft,well maintained enginesand good
intense. Consequently, more and more airlines are flight planning and procedures.
looking to optimize their fuel consumption as a
means of minimizing overall costs. This article highlights existing Airbus ‘Getting to
grips with’ publications where information on
optimizing fuel consumption can be found and
identifies some additional areas for consideration.
Simon Weselby Frédéric Desgeorge
A320 Family Programme Manager A330/A340 Programme Manager
Airbus Customer Services Airbus Customer Services
32
COUNTERING JET FUEL PRICE INCREASES - GUIDANCE ON FUEL SAVING
getting hands-on getting to grips getting to grips
experience with aircraft with aircraft
with aerodynamic performance performance
deterioration ISSUE 1 - JANUARY 2002 monitoring
ISSUE 2 - OCTOBER 2001 ISSUE 1 - JANUARY 2003
This examines the influence of This addresses three different This provides guidelines for air-
aerodynamic deterioration on aspects of aircraft performance: craft performance monitoring
operational costs. During an air- • Physical aspect: Reminders on based on feedback obtained from
craft’s life deterioration is likely to flight mechanics, aerodynamics, many operators and on Airbus’
occur and drag can increase by up altimetry, influence of external knowledge of its aircraft. It has
to 2% within five years. This in parameters on aircraft five-objectives:
turn can result in a significant fuel performance, flight optimization • Introduce performance
consumption increase. However, concepts, etc. monitoring, presenting the
this cost has to be traded against • Regulatory aspect: Description different analysis methods and
the cost of maintenance to estab- of the main JAR and FAR tools.
lish when it is cost-effective to certification and operating rules, • How to deal with the amount of
carry out corrective measures. leading to the establishment of data required, the most common
limitations. ways to get data routinely
Cost-benefit analyses are a practi- • Operational aspect: Description recorded are described via a
cal way to approach this and of operational methods, aircraft quick overview of the available
Airbus has carried out numerous computer logics, operational aircraft systems.
performance audits in cooperation procedures, pilot’s actions, etc. • Guidelines on the way to
with airlines. Consequently this process the data using one of the
can help operators determine cor- Airbus aircraft performance-
rective actions that are financially monitoring tools, namely the
beneficial despite the short-term APM programme.
maintenance costs. • Assessing data coming from
regular cruise performance
analysis.
• Airbus recommendations on
how to use the results of
analysis in daily aircraft
operations.
35
73
TSAF
COUNTERING JET FUEL PRICE INCREASES - GUIDANCE ON FUEL SAVING
Other areas for • Developing an engine water
wash schedule
consideration
Over time, dirt accumulation on
the compressor airfoils reduces
In addition to the ‘getting to grips engine compressor efficiency.
with’ publications an airline has Engine core water washes are
many other routes available for recommended to remove this.
minimizing fuel expenditure, Contamination levels depend on
including: the aircraft’s operation and
• Minimizing dispatches under environment, so wash frequency
MEL (Minimum Equipment must be optimized by each
List) conditionsthat include operator. Periodic engine water
requirements for additional fuel washes also have a positive
reserves, or where fuel burn is effect on the exhaust gas
increased. temperature margin and
Example: dispatch with wing consequently on engine life
anti-ice valve failed in open • Trading passenger comfort or
position may increase fuel service against weight (carrying
consumption by up to 6% newspapers, magazines,
depending on aircraft. blankets, reducing potable water
• Implementing an engine health carried, etc.).
monitoring system
Example: engine component
defects may increase fuel
consumption while remaining
operational and engine health
monitoring can highlight such
increases.
• Working closely with the
engine shopto establish an
CONTACT DETAILS
optimized refurbishment
workscope that provides the best Simon Weselby
compromise between cost, A320 Family Programme
reliability and performance Manager
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 75 16
restoration
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 30 00 79
simon.weselby@airbus.com
Frédéric Desgeorge
A330/A340 Programme
Manager
Airbus Customer Services
Tel :+33 (0) 5 61 93 42 01
Fax :+33 (0) 5 61 30 00 79
frederic.desgeorge@airbus.com
Conclusion
Airbus has previously published be best served by adopting a holistic or
a wide range of information and airline-wide approach and not making fuel
recommendations for the optimization economy the responsibility of any single
of both aircraft performance and fuel entity in the organization.
economy. These publications remain
as valid today as when they were Airbus also recognizes the increasing
published (with the exception of certain importance of fuel efficiency to its
economic conditions). The breadth of customers so further support will become
these recommendations illustrate that an available during the course of 2006.
airline wishing to minimize its fuel bill will
35
73
TSAF
34
73
TSAF
GIANTS OF THE SKIES, PAST AND PRESENT
Giants of the skies,
past and present
A ‘giant of the skies’, a seven seater Fokker D378 of Aero Lloyd, lands at Hamburg Fuhlsbüttel
airport in Germany in 1926 - the same year Germany’s main airport Frankfurt opened.
Almost 80 years later, on 29 October 2005, another ‘giant of the skies’landed at Frankfurt airport
and is shown docked. This is the 555 seater Airbus A380 - how things have changed, not only for
aircraft but airports too!
36
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Philippe Bordes
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3464 Customer Support Centres
Training centres
CHINA Spares centres / Regional warehouses
Ron Bollekamp Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
Senior Director Customer Support RCSM location Country RCSM location Country
Tel: +86 10 804 86161
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates London United Kingdom
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63
Ajaccio France Louisville United States of America
Algiers Algeria Luton United Kingdom
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT Al-Manamah Bahrain Macau S.A.R. China
ADMINISTRATION Amman Jordan Madrid Spain
Amsterdam Netherlands Manchester United Kingdom
Jean-Philippe Guillon
Athens Greece Manila Philippines
Director Auckland New Zealand Mauritius Mauritius
Resident Customer Support Administration Baku Azerbaijan Memphis United States of America
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02 Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei Mexico City Mexico
Bangalore India Miami United States of America
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64
Bangkok Thailand Milan Italy
Barcelona Spain Minneapolis United States of America
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Beirut Lebanon Montreal Canada
Berlin Germany Moscow Russia
Airbus has its main spares centre in Hamburg,
Brussels Belgium Mumbai India
and regional warehouses in Frankfurt, Buenos Aires Argentina Nanchang China
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Cairo Egypt Nanjing China
Casablanca Morocco New York United States of America
Charlotte United States of America Newcastle Australia
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day.
Chengdu China Ningbo China
AOG Technical and Spares calls. Cologne Germany Noumea New Caledonia
Colombo Sri Lanka Orlando United States of America
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Copenhagen Denmark Palma de Mallorca Spain
Dalian China Paris France
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00
Damascus Syria Paro Bhutan
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Delhi India Phoenix United States of America
support.airtac@airbus.com Denver United States of America Pittsburgh United States of America
Derby United Kingdom Prague Czech Republic
Detroit United States of America Qingdao China
Spares AOGs in North America should be
Dhaka Bangladesh Quito Ecuador
addressed to: Doha Qatar Rome Italy
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Donetsk Ukraine San’a Yemen
Dubai United Arab Emirates San Francisco United States of America
Fax:+1 (703) 729 4373
Dublin Ireland San Salvador El Salvador
Duluth United States of America Santiago Chile
Spares AOGs outside North America Dusseldorf Germany Sao Paulo Brazil
should be addressed to: Fort Lauderdale United States of America Seoul South Korea
Frankfurt Germany Shanghai China
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 3001/3002/3003
Guangzhou China Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Fax:+49 (40) 50 76 3011/3012/3013 Hangzhou China Shenyang China
Haikou China Shenzhen China
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Hanoi Vietnam Singapore Singapore
Helsinki Finland Sydney Australia
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33
Hong Kong S.A.R. China Taipei Taiwan
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Indianapolis United States of America Tashkent Uzbekistan
Istanbul Turkey Tehran Iran
Airbus Training subsidiaries Jakarta Indonesia Tokyo Japan
Jinan China Toronto Canada
Miami, USA - Florida
Johannesburg South Africa Toulouse France
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Karachi Pakistan Tulsa United States of America
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 kita-Kyushu Japan Tunis Tunisia
Beijing, China Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Vienna Austria
Kuwait city Kuwait Washington United States of America
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Lanzhou China Xi'an China
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 Larnaca Cyprus Zurich Switzerland
Lisbon Portugal
73
TSAF
37
www.airbusworld.com
Over a million pages of information, now online.
We could write pages and pages on how we can make personalised details and you can even cut and paste any
your business information management more cost effective. relevant information into your own
But why hunt through endless filing cabinets when with documents. Don’t go through the
Airbus On-Line Services you get rapid, up to date access long haul to find what you want,
to all our technical data? It’s simple and easy to use. visit www.airbusworld.com instead.
All subscribers have totally secure access to all their Airbus. Setting the standards.
