E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
1
5
T
S
A
F
FAST
51
J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 3
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened Structure Trainings and new Consumable Material
Lists (CML). A dedicated NDT (Non-Destructive
Testing) workshop allowed the participants to
Airbus Lessors Conference
practice on Pulse Thermography and Ultrasonic
The 9th Lessors Conference took place in October
Phased Array methods.
in the United States with over 140 participants
from 90 leasing companies. The lessors appreciated
the initiative of the presentations to promote an Technical Data Support & Services symposium
interactive approach with the audience and an An impressive participation of more than
exchange with Airbus’ Customer Services & 160 attendees from operators, suppliers and MROs
Support senior management team. attended this sixth Technical Data symposium held
Many important technical subjects have been in Istanbul (Turkey).
raised with a focus on Upgrade Services. Fleet “Supporting your Digital Operations!” was this
performance, new regulations, requirements, safety edition’s motto covering solutions for technical
enhancements and solutions, including the Sharklet data in the fields of Maintenance & Repair,
retrofit presentations have been shown. Spares & Suppliers, Scheduled Maintenance,
In addition to services for lessors and improvements Service Bulletins and Flight Operations. More
in the efficiency of aircraft transitions, a new service than 30 presentations, demos and workshops were
was presented which is part of an EASA process delivered by Airbus and some additional subjects
when required to import/export an aircraft to/from were kindly presented by guest speakers from Qatar
the European Union. Airways, TAP Maintenance & Engineering and
Zodiac Aerospace. After an interesting caucus, the
attendees highlighted the exceptional networking
Airbus Material, Logistics, Suppliers
opportunity in such events and delivered strong
and Warranty symposium
encouragements to keep up the good work in the
The overwhelmingly positive feedback that Airbus future!
received for this year’s symposium in Bangkok
(Thailand) has once again proven that ‘Material Coming soon
Matters!’. This event gathered 109 customers and
22 suppliers who received an update on the latest
developments and initiatives that were taken. Material Management seminars 2013
Interactive discussions in various workshops Cost reduction and increased operational efficiency
and caucus sessions facilitated the right frame are permanent objectives in today’s challenging
to commonly develop solutions and get prepared times. In order to respond, Airbus has scheduled
for the anticipated market growth. Airbus has 11 seminars in 2013 with different levels of
listened carefully to the customers’ requirements, specialization in different locations around the world,
is evaluating them and will take actions accordingly specifically developed to support more efficient
with the aim of presenting the results at the next material management. The training portfolio has
symposium. been extended by including now a “Tools and GSE
Detailed information is available on the dedicated seminar”. Airbus also offers on-site courses fully
e-site on the AirbusWorld homepage (in the “What’s tailored to suit the customers’ needs.
new” box). For further details, please contact:
spares.training@airbus.com or see the detailed
A successful Structure seminar schedule with dates and locations on the AirbusWorld
Early November in Toulouse (France), over Material Management community homepage.
116 worldwide representatives from airlines,
lessors and MRO organisations participated to this Airbus 2013 events’ agenda
seminar, creating a unique opportunity for the At the time of FAST magazine going to press, the
structure community to share relevant subjects 2013 event agenda is being organized and major
and gather the overall experience, knowledge and Airbus events such as the A380 symposium or the
support necessary to empower the motto: “Structure Airbus 11th Training symposium are taking place,
Support: A joint effort”. both events in Dubai (United Arab Emirates).
Airbus structure specialists provided technical In the next edition, we will provide you with the
presentations, including maintenance programme outcome of these events and the fixed dates of the
topics and in-service fleet issues. Demonstrations upcoming events.
were provided on IDOLS, Repair Manager,
15
TSAF
J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 3
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
Events
eTaxi
Taxiing aircraft with engines stopped
Yann NICOLAS
A320 Family Sharklet retrofit
Hunting down fuel burn
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET Simon GALPIN
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD François HUGO
Widespread Fatigue Damage
Page layout: quatcoul
A300B: Compliance to the ageing
Cover: Sharklet retrofit aircraft regulation
Photo by: Philippe MASCLET
Nicolas TURREL
Authorisation for reprint of FAST Magazine articles should be requested Didier AURICHE
from the editor at the FAST Magazine e-mail address given below
Optimized spare parts investment
Customer Services Communications
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88 Initial Provisioning influencing
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73 A350 XWB development
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer: Amadio Stefan TRINKER
Daniel SCHWARZER
FAST Magazine may be read on Internet
http://www.airbus.com/support/publications
under ‘Quick references’ Managing aircraft security
ISSN 1293-5476 A new challenge for the air
transportation community
© AIRBUS S.A.S. 2012. AN EADS COMPANY
All rights reserved. Proprietary document Pascal ANDREI
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter “Magazine”), you accept on behalf Gernot LADSTAETTER
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted Isabelle DUFEU
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus S.A.S. This Magazine and the
Airport taxiing
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive A new era relieving animals
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
Customer Services Worldwide
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on Around the clock... Around the world
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus S.A.S
can be contacted to provide further details. Airbus S.A.S shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus S.A.S has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction.
Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
15
TSAF
51
2
11
17
24
29
36
37
This issue of FAST Magazine has been printed
on paper produced without using chlorine, to reduce
Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: waste and help conserve natural resources.
Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Flight Test Photo Lab, EADS Corporate Heritage, ExM Company, Eurocontrol. Every little helps!
1
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
15
TSAF
eTaxi
Taxiing aircraft with
engines stopped
The idea to taxi aircraft without the main engine its products and develop environmental-friendly
thrust is not recent. When Aerospatiale’s (one of solutions, Airbus’ Research and Technology
Airbus’ founder partners) design office provided programme has revisited this case with various
its conclusions on a study for “motorised wheels solutions in the recent years. Today’s improved
for autonomous taxiing for a 76 tonnes subsonic technologies considering more electrical equip-
aircraft” back in 1977 (figure 1), the technology ment power over the equipment mass ratio, higher
and oil prices were not at today’s high level, reliability figures and fuel prices together with a
making this idea a “must” to offer. As part of longer taxi time, are making an onboard solution
Airbus’ commitment to continuously improve for autonomous taxiing more and more attractive.
Yann NICOLAS
Research and Technology
Programme Leader
Aircraft Control
Airbus S.A.S.
2
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
eTaxi for which
aircraft? eTaxi system and TaxiBot
While eTaxi is an on-board solution, 100 seats (both Airbus and non-
Aircraft taxiing is today performed TaxiBot is a product that enables Airbus types).
through the use of engine thrust. aircraft taxiing with engines It will target a deployment on the
On twin-engine aircraft, one or the stopped and APU running, using major airports where such concept
two engines are used while taxiing, a diesel-electric tractor controlled makes sense.
depending on the operator’s policy by the aircraft’s pilot through his There will be two TaxiBot variants:
and operational conditions. regular controls (tiller and brake One for single-aisle aircraft (Narrow
The eTaxi system offers: pedals). -Body TaxiBot) and the other for
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Taxi-out and taxi-in with all When taxi-out is completed, twin-aisle types (Wide-Body
engines stopped capability, TaxiBot is disconnected from the TaxiBot).
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)A total aircraft autonomy aircraft Nose Landing Gear by the The first prototype is currently in
allowing the aircraft to TaxiBot driver, who then drives test phase at Châteauroux (France),
“pushback” without any tractor. back the vehicle to the apron. with an operational test under
Unlike eTaxi which is specific to real conditions to be conducted
The eTaxi system is an onboard A320, this concept of tow-bar-less at Frankfurt am Main Airport
solution. This means that there towing aims at the capability to tow (Germany) in spring 2013.
is some significant hardware all types of aircraft with more than
to be installed on the aircraft,
consequently some weight to be
added.
This explains why such a
eTaxi electric motor and transmission
technology is only considered for
installation on Main Landing Gear
short and medium range aircraft,
and not for long haul flights in Figure 2
which the aircraft would burn the
fuel saved on ground, in flight.
So it is intended to propose eTaxi
as an option available for the A320
Family fleet, only.
Airbus is working with the
objective to propose both forward
fit and retrofit.
Motorized wheels’ principle
designed by Aerospatiale in 1977
Figure 1
3
llewyenoH
&
NARFAS
fo
ysetruoC
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
eTaxi system
performances and
architecture
Whereas eTaxi system perfor-
mances and characteristics are still
under construction and refinement,
some key design objectives are
On-going testing
emerging.
Airbus testing: the Landing Gear configuration,
Airbus is using the APTV (Accelerated to MTOW, and centre of gravity of TAXI-OUT AND TAXI-IN OPERATIONS
Pavement Testing Vehicle) so-called an A320. The “MOSART“ (Modular
the “Turtle” (figures 3 & 4), in an Simulator for Airbus Research Tests) Studies have been conducted to
A320 configuration, to measure key simulator is used by flight test pilots propose the best operational
sizing parameters. Amongst them, to evaluate the most appropriate compromise between the eTaxi
the simulation of the “breakaway” eTaxi control device. More than five performance (speed, acceleration,
forces needed to move the aircraft different manoeuvrability concepts aircraft weight, external condi-
with almost “square tyres”, to test (HMI – Human Machine Interface) tions, etc.) and the sizing (hence
the phenomenon after a long stop. have already been tested. additional hardware weight
This “Turtle” vehicle has been used onboard).
for the HTPT (High Tyre Pressure Partners’ testing: Airbus is aiming to achieve a
Testing - read FAST 48 magazine) Major partners have already performance requirement for taxi
but the Main Landing Gear beams pre-evaluated some concepts. They speed of 20kts (knots).
have been displaced and the are now assembling prototypes for This speed is fully compatible with
weight adjusted to correspond to full scale testing. airport ground traffic and does
not impact taxi time, whether the
aircraft will be equipped, or not,
with the eTaxi system. This has been
confirmed after having conducted
ground traffic simulations in
The Turtle
several major airports.
Figure 3
4
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
An acceleration capability of 0 to The choice of the Main Landing
20kts in 90 seconds is considered as Gear versus the Nose Landing Gear
fully sufficient from an operational is to allow the eTaxi operations
view point, as well. in all usual operational cases
dd e f i n i t i o n
(i.e.: On wet taxiways, at MTOW
REARWARD (“PUSHBACK”) (Maximum Take-Off Weight) PPoowweerr eelleecctronics is the appli-
OPERATION: and at the rear centre of gravity cation of solid-state electro nics
for the control and conversion of
location). A Nose Landing Gear
electrical power in order to drive
The rearward operation is a key solution would provide a limited
the electric motor at a variable
feature offered by the eTaxi system. traction capability due to a weaker
rotational speed. Hence, power
The pilot controls the backup of the vertical load on this gear.
electronics converts electrical
aircraft from the cockpit thanks to power (at frequency and voltage
an onboard device, at a maximum The power electronics which levels) from aircraft electrical
speed of 3kts. supplies and controls the electric network to the electric motors.
motors is air cooled and installed
ETAXI SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE close to the Main Landing Gear
bay, requiring no cargo space.
The eTaxi system includes electrical The eTaxi system is fully controlled
motors and their associated power from the cockpit. Additional
electronics, electrical power pro- control means, indications and
tections, wires, cockpit control warnings are added for the pilot’s
devices and control laws. control and awareness, during the
Large air cooled electric motors eTaxi phase.
are integrated in between the Main
Landing Gear wheels. The eTaxi control laws shall be
These electric motors are sized to integrated in the aircraft avionics.
provide the required torque to move Various solutions are investigated
the aircraft (breakaway force due to (e.g.: Dedicated control unit or
“square tyre effect” as simulated in eTaxi control software can be
figure 4) and to insure the required hosted into the existing computer,
acceleration and taxi cruise speed such as the Braking and Steering
in most conditions (taxiway slope, Control Unit - BSCU). Test installation for torque
measurement on the Turtle
adverse wind, etc.).
Figure 4
5
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
Where does the However, the taxi performance with
both engines stopped cannot be
electric power
the nominal one in all conditions.
come from? While acceptable on many airports,
it may not be sufficient at large
airports with long taxiways
The technical and commercial as there is not enough electric
electrical needs are still ensured and power to supply both, the normal
the bleed power is still available electrical loads and the eTaxi
for the Environmental Control system for a full performance.
System (ECS). Several operational As an example, an A320 at
options and design solutions can be MTOW (Maximum Take-Off
considered: Weight) of 78 tonnes would only
reach a maximum speed of 12kts.
Base eTaxi solution The performance is, of course,
Keeping today’s APU, both better for a lighter aircraft of
engines stopped but accepting 69 tonnes at 13.5kts.
reduced performance. Using the
existing APU (Auxiliary Power Hybrid eTaxi solution
Unit) with its actual generator of Keeping today’s APU, one engine
90kVA (kilo Volt Ampere) is the at idle benefitting from a full
favourite and simplest solution to performance. By still keeping the
go for a minimum change. existing APU and APU generator
ON, one engine can be kept at idle
Usual flight operations versus
during the eTaxi operation.
eTaxi
Figure 5
Cruise
b D
m e
Taxi-out Cli s c
e
n
t Taxi-in
P
u s h b a c
E
k
n
gi n e st
T
a u rt g di s c o n n e
cti o n
E n
gi n e dri v e n t a
xii n g
Fli
g h t
gi
n e
dri v e n t a xii n g Today
n
E
a c k n g n)
A ut o n o m o u s P p u o s t ( e h n n b o t i a t u l g ti m di e s c s o a n v E n i l e e c c t t r i o i c t a xii n g E n gi n e st ar E t n gi n e dri v e n t a xii n g* Fli g h t
E n
gi n e dri v e n t a xii n g*
El e
ctri c t a xii n g e W T i a t x h i
(*) Engine warm-up and cool-down phases
6
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
This solution offers all the sizing and in consequence, to adapt
required electric power for a full the APU. Trade-off studies are still
performance (20kts on A320 on-going by Airbus for an APU
at MTOW) as the engine IDG modification, aiming to increase, dd e f i n i t i o n
(Integrated Drive Generator) and or not, its available electric power.
APU generator are used together AAiirrccrraafftt mmarshalling is the
to supply the aircraft normal loads signaling and communication
eTaxi operation
and eTaxi system. Nevertheless, between the ground handling
there is still a significant fuel saving personnel and pilots. The usual
with this solution (even compared equipment of a marshaller is a
NO TUG TO WAIT FOR PUSHBACK
to usual single engine taxiing) due reflecting safety vest, a helmet
to the engine thrust of the aircraft with acoustic earmuffs, gloves or
By switching the eTaxi push-
not being used to accelerate - the marshalling wands and handheld
button ON with the APU running,
acceleration being taken in charge illuminated beacons.
the pilot activates eTaxi and
by the eTaxi system. Obviously,
configures various other systems.
there is still the full benefit of the
“autonomous pushback” done with
The Yellow hydraulic circuit
both engines stopped and with the
(figure 6) Electrical Motor Pump
APU only.
(EMP) which is electrically
supplied by the APU generator,
Full eTaxi solution
provides the required hydraulic
Modified APU with a new APU
power for the nose wheel steering
generator. The only way to get
and for alternate braking (the
a full eTaxi performance with
Power Transfer Unit is turned off).
all engines stopped in every
conditions (notably taking in Then, the pilot is ready to backup
consideration the aircraft weight) the aircraft guided by one or two Three independent hydraulic
circuits on the A320 Family
is to increase the APU generator marshallers.
Figure 6
Blue circuit Green circuit Yellow circuit
EMP RAT EDP EDP EMP
Hydraulic eTaxi
PTU configuration
Primary Flight Primary Flight EDP: Engine Driven Pump
Controls
Controls EMP: Electric Motor Pump
Primary Flight PTU: Power Transfer Unit
Controls
Flaps RAT: Ram Air Turbine
Slats
Slats & Flaps
Reverse
Brake
Engine #2
Hydraulic
Reverse Accumulator
Emergency Engine #1 Nose Wheel
Generator Steering
Landing Gear
Alternate Brakes
Normal Brakes
Cargo Doors
These three circuits supply several systems such as flight controls, high-lift, landing gear extension/retraction, braking, etc.
The Green circuit supplies the normal braking system while the Yellow circuit supplies the alternate braking
and nose wheel steering. Yellow alternate braking is backed-up by the brake hydraulic accumulator, in case of Yellow
hydraulic system failure.
Note: The nose wheel steering has been powered by the Yellow hydraulic circuit system since the MSN 1939.
7
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
TAXI-OUT TAXI-IN
When the backup operation The engines are switched-off after
is completed, the pilot may landing, the pilot exits the runway,
immediately proceed to the eTaxi the APU is started and the eTaxi
forward phase without waiting for mode is switched ON. There is no
the tractor’s disconnection. need to stop the aircraft to engage
The pilot uses the eTaxi control the eTaxi mode.
device from the cockpit to
accelerate and the usual brake Depending on whether the high
pedals to slow down or stop the thrust has been applied or not
Average taxi time aircraft. It also allows switching during the reverse thrust, it may
off the electric motor power supply be required to wait approximately
from Airbus study
to gently decelerate the aircraft three minutes to let the engines
A320 Family in-service statis tics without using any brakes at all. cool down before switching them
12 months fleet average off.
(April 2012) As the engines must be started
4 to 5 minutes prior to take-off Finally, the aircraft is electrically
(cid:201)(cid:1)A(cid:1)verage flight duration: for warm-up, the eTaxi system is driven up to the gate, with no need
1.8 Flight Hours (FH) designed to allow the engine start- for tug, which may be mandatory
(cid:201)(cid:1)A(cid:1)verage daily utilisation: up while eTaxiing the aircraft. when local restrictions prohibit the
8.9 FH/day
The eTaxi system automatically engine use close to the apron.
(cid:201)(cid:1)A(cid:1)verage taxi time:
disengages when both engines are
20 minutes (0.3 FH/flight)
ON or above 20kts.
eTaxi reduces
In average, an A320 spends
Remark: In case of Hybrid eTaxi fuel burn
more than 15% of its time
taxiing. (i.e. With one engine at idle), the
aircraft operation will be very
similar to the existing single engine Taxiing and queuing penalize
taxi operations. the optimisation of an aircraft’s
performance. A short and medium
The main difference is that range aircraft may spend from 10
acceleration control is done only to 30% of its time on taxiways
by using the eTaxi control device (statistics based on 35 major
in one case, and by using the European airports, absorbing
engine thrust control lever in the 50% of European departures).
other case. Consequently, aircraft of these
ranges burn up to 10% of their fuel
on ground.
Fuel burn reduction on ground
depends on several parameters
such as:
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Reference scenario (today’s
operation): One or two engines
taxi-out/taxi-in,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Taxi-out and taxi-in duration,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Taxiing: Number of stops
and starts.
8
9
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
Estimated fuel savings
with eTaxi
Figure 7
Block fuel = Trip fuel + Taxi fuel
Trip fuel
Thee eeTTaxi system adds some weight; however the impact on block fuel is limiitteedd..
OOnn a 500 NM flight, +400kg* represents an additional 16kg fuel burn.
* Weight non-contractual
Taxi fuel
2 engines taxi 12.5 kg/min Hybrid eTaxi 7 kg/min
(one engine at idle + APU)
Today eTaxi
S + in A g P l U e engine taxi 9.5 kg/min F (A u P l U l e o T nl a y) xi 2 kg/min
BBllockk ffuellll saviingg
Case of Full eTaxi versuus single engine taxi
Fuel saving=16 kg - ( 9.5 kg/min - 2 kg/min ) x ( 20 min - ( 5 min + 3 min ) ) = - 74 kg
Trip fuel One Engine
degradation engine APU Total warm-up
on 500 NM taxi taxi time + cooling
time
Remark: Tractor disconnection
saving time not included.
Full eTaxi versus two engines taxi -110 kg
Full eTaxi versus single engine taxi -74 kg Block
fuel
Example of A320 with CFM56-5B4/3 Hybrid eTaxi versus two engines taxi -50 kg saving
(similar results with IAE):
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:17)(cid:17)(cid:1)(cid:47)(cid:46)(cid:1)(cid:9)(cid:47)(cid:66)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:74)(cid:68)(cid:66)(cid:77)(cid:1)(cid:46)(cid:74)(cid:77)(cid:70)(cid:10)(cid:1)(cid:71)(cid:77)(cid:74)(cid:72)(cid:73)(cid:85) Hybrid eTaxi versus single engine taxi -14 kg
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:19)(cid:17)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:84)(cid:1)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:66)(cid:89)(cid:74)(cid:14)(cid:80)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:1)(cid:81)(cid:77)(cid:86)(cid:84)(cid:1)(cid:85)(cid:66)(cid:89)(cid:74)(cid:14)(cid:74)(cid:79)
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:22)(cid:1)(cid:78)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:86)(cid:85)(cid:70)(cid:84)(cid:1)(cid:68)(cid:80)(cid:79)(cid:84)(cid:74)(cid:69)(cid:70)(cid:83)(cid:70)(cid:69)(cid:1)(cid:71)(cid:80)(cid:83)(cid:1)(cid:70)(cid:79)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:79)(cid:70)(cid:1)(cid:88)(cid:66)(cid:83)(cid:78)(cid:14)(cid:86)(cid:81)(cid:1)
and 3 minutes for engine cooling
700 NM Sector length (NM)
250 500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000
1%
Hybrid eTaxi offers
0%
about 1.5% fuel burn
reduction* for typical - 1,5% -1%
A320 sector and taxi time
- 2%
- 3%
Full eTaxi offers
- 4%
about 3% fuel burn
reduction* for typical - 5%
A320 sector and taxi time Fuel burn - 6%
reduction
-7%
* versus 2 engines taxi
- 8%
- 9%
- 10%
14 min total taaxxii ttiimme 22 minn ttootal taxi tiimmee
9
15
TSAF
ETAXI-TAXIING AIRCRAFT WITH ENGINES STOPPED
Expected eTaxi (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)More autonomy versus airport
infrastructures (no waiting
benefits
for tug, no tug to pay for),
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Overall flight time savings by
By allowing the taxi with the main eliminating time disconnecting
engines stopped, the eTaxi solution the tug after pushback,
brings a direct fuel burn reduction (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Less use of wheel brakes
and: during taxi as there is no engine
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)A major reduction in ground residual thrust, leading to
emissions (COx and NOx), potential brake wear reduction,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Noise reduction on ramp with (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Less risk of engine ingestion of
obvious benefits for ground damaging debris (Foreign Object
staff, Damage - FOD) and no engine
jet blast blowing close to the
gate,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Improved safety for ground staff,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)High precision manoeuvring
(no engine spool-up lag and
inertia).
Evidently, the use of eTaxi does
not impair aircraft operation
capabilities and passenger comfort.
CONTACT DETAILS
Yann NICOLAS
Research and Technology
Programme Leader
Aircraft Control
Airbus S.A.S.
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 68 20
Conclusion
The eTaxi (electric taxiing) system is a very In the long term, another generation
promising system that provides aircraft of eTaxi will likely emerge with the
autonomy, reducing the use of engines next generation of short-medium range
during the taxi operations. It leads to aircraft. As an example, we already know
substantial fuel savings while reducing that eTaxi may offer many additional
emissions. functionalities and benefits, when fully
Airbus is actually investigating, in close integrated in the aircraft design from
collaboration with several industrial the beginning, This is especially true when
partners, different architectures and we consider the more electrical aircraft
technologies for the best possible architectures which are being studied by
integration at aircraft level. A fully mature Airbus, targeting a more efficient aircraft.
solution which preserves the recognized The “More Electrical Aircraft”, or even
A320 Family Operational Reliability (OR) in the future the “All Electrical Aircraft”
is targeted. Airbus is using all its available concepts, are aiming to make the electrical
development, tests and certification power the main or sole source of on-board
resources to converge toward the most power for flight controls, high-lift, the
optimized solution. Environmental Control System, wing
eTaxi must be easy to install, remove, anti-ice, etc. This would allow the hydraulic
operate, and also easy to maintain. and bleed systems’ deletion.
10
15
TSAF
A320 FAMILY SHARKLET RETROFIT - HUNTING DOWN FUEL BURN
A320 Family
Sharklet retrofit
Hunting down fuel burn
With the evolution of fuel prices in the last years aerodynamics and therefore, improve the fuel-
and the pressure to limit the environmental impact efficiency of an aircraft amongst other operational
of aviation, reducing fuel burn has become a enhancements.
matter of great importance for airlines. This article presents the Sharklet retrofit solution
To meet this challenge, Airbus decided in 2009 Airbus is proposing for the A320 Family aircraft,
to offer A320 Family customers the option of highlights the benefits that this new device will
ordering Sharklets on new-build aircraft and give the airlines, and also presents the challenges
launched the “Sharklet Project”. Sharklets are Airbus’ engineers faced during the development
large wing-tip devices designed to optimize the of this project.
Simon GALPIN François HUGO
Head of Airframe Development Sharklet Retrofit Engineering
Sharklet Retrofit Project Coordination Manager
Airbus Operations Airbus S.A.S.
11
A320 FAMILY SHARKLET RETROFIT - HUNTING DOWN FUEL BURN
15
TSAF
Aerodynamic drag There are a number of means
to reduce the vortex drag of an
reduction
aircraft by:
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Increasing the wing span,
The aerodynamic efficiency of an (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Increasing the effective span
aircraft wing depends on its drag, by adding near vertical elements
which is made up of: to the wing tip, effectively
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Profile drag - driven by surface increasing the length of trailing
area of the total airframe, edge,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Wave drag - driven by transonic (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Adjusting how the lift generated
dd e f i n i t i o n
shocks, mostly on the wing, by the wing is distributed along
VVoorrtteexx sshheeddding is an unsteady (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Vortex drag (also known as its span.
oscillating flow that takes place induced drag) - driven by lift
when a fluid such as air or water creation. Unfortunately, all of the above is
flows past a blunt cylindrical body usually accompanied by weight
at certain velocities. Sharklets especially act to reduce increase, hence the need to balance
the vortex drag. When the faster drag and weight very carefully in
moving air along the top of the coming up with an optimum wing
wing meets the slow moving air design.
underneath the wing tip, it creates
swirling vortex of air known as a The wing tip fences shown in
“wing tip vortex”. Through this, figure 1 - as seen on the A380
the wing is continuously shedding and the A320 ceo (current engine
vorticity (related to vortices) option) - work by modifying the
into its wake; this shedding is wing lift distribution. Such devices
particularly concentrated in have particular advantages. As
the wing tip region, resulting in they are compact in span, they
the wing tip vortices which are can easily be added to wings
commonly visible when aircraft where the wing box tip is already
are flying in suitable atmospheric close to the aircraft’s airport gate
conditions. limit. They also lead to relatively
small increases in the aircraft and
In fact, the vortex drag component especially wing loads. However,
for transport aircraft flying at the benefit they provide is
transonic speeds represents around correspondingly modest.
50% of the total aircraft drag.
Since engine thrust is required to Sharklets provide larger induced
overcome this drag, it is clearly drag reductions than wing tip
essential to achieve the lowest fences by creating much more
vortex drag level possible for an significant changes to the wing
aircraft in order to minimize its loading and effective span.
fuel burn, so long as the measures These offer the scope for large
involved are suitably traded against fuel burn reductions in cruise and
A320 with wing tip fences weight. significant improvements in climb
performance.
Figure 1
The Sharklet
retrofit for the
in-service fleet
After the success of the Sharklet
option for new aircraft and
following customers’ requests,
Airbus has started the Sharklet
retrofit project.
12
This retrofit option will provide The aerodynamic benefits of
customers with the opportunity Sharklets have proven to reduce
to upgrade their existing fleet of drag. Hence, the retrofit package
A319s and A320s (followed by will offer operators reduced fuel
the A321 at a later stage of the costs – fuel being one of the
project) with Sharklets. Thanks to most significant operating costs
the Sharklet retrofit (figure 2), the for airlines. Thanks to lower fuel
residual values of the A320 Family burn, Sharklets also reduce CO
2
(new and in-service fleets) will be emissions and the environmental
protected, or even improved. footprint of the airline.
The Sharklet upgrade package that Another advantage for airlines
Airbus offers includes: is the possibility to operate new
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)The Sharklets and attachment longer routes. With the fuel burn
ribs, reduction, retrofitted aircraft will
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Outer wing reinforcements, be able to reach further destinations
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Pre-assembled reinforcement with the same tank capacity. The
kits, device creates new opportunities
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)A detailed Service Bulletin for airlines. Sharklet-equipped
(SB) including embodiment aircraft either will be able to reach
instructions, new destinations, or will be able to
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)An assessment of avionics increase the number of passengers
pre-requisites and existing onboard. Currently, on certain
“Repairs and Concessions” routes and due to fuel restrictions,
for the individual aircraft. airlines cannot operate at maximum
passenger capacity. Thanks again
The challenge was to be able to offer to Sharklets, the retrofitted-fleet
a cost/weight effective solution airline will be able to receive more
with minimum aircraft downtime passengers onboard, for these
during the retrofit embodiment. restricted routes.
From the onset, one of the top-
level requirements was to minimize Sharklet equipped aircraft can
the modification to the wing. provide benefits to airlines in
The retrofit programme had the climb-limited airports. Indeed,
benefit of being able to use a lot thanks to better climb capabilities,
of transferable work from the new a Sharklet equipped aircraft has
aircraft, allowing the programme better take-off performance. Hence,
to rapidly progress from its initial it can operate more efficiently
launch to a maturity suitable to from high, hot, obstacle-limited,
offer to Airbus customers. weight-limited and noise-restricted
airports. Airlines can also recover
Advantages better payload capability thanks to
Sharklets.
for airlines
Due to a reduced overall aircraft
From the beginning, it was decided drag, a retrofitted aircraft needs
that both the Sharklet retrofit and lower engine thrust in cruise and
the linefit Sharklet devices should in some cases, at take-off and
be identical, and therefore fully during climb. Therefore, engine
interchangeable. Therefore, the maintenance cost diminishes and
benefits of the retrofit solution are the engine’s life is extended.
nearly the same as those of the
production Sharklet option.
15
TSAF
A320 FAMILY SHARKLET RETROFIT - HUNTING DOWN FUEL BURN
Airbus Sharklet
Figure 2
nn o t e s
LLiinnee ffiitt // ffooorrward fit:
The aircraft comes equipped from
the Final Assembly Line (FAL).
13
A320 FAMILY SHARKLET RETROFIT - HUNTING DOWN FUEL BURN
The Sharklet The added challenge was that the
solution needed to use typical
retrofit challenges
MRO (Maintenance Repair and
Overhaul) organisation methods
Attaching the Sharklets increases and tools.
the static and fatigue loads in the
A319 and A320 wings. The third major challenge for the
Therefore, their original wing reinforcement design was that it
design had to be reinforced to be needed to be embodied on existing
able to carry the additional loads aircraft and was restricted to the
introduced by the Sharklet. The wing. Therefore, the reinforcement
forward fit wing reinforcement needed to be integrated into the
design is ideal for production, existing structure and systems
but it would require a very long including high lift, fuel, control
downtime and the associated costs systems, and consider variants
would be too high. This means of the aircraft to enable the
the retrofit design team needed to modification to apply to as many
create a unique solution. A319/A320 aircraft as possible.
The first major design challenge The last challenge is called the
was to create a wing reinforcement “downtime challenge”. Downtime
strategy that did not downgrade the refers to the time an aircraft is
aircraft’s performance, compared to not flying and not profitable
the forward fit. Therefore, the wing for the airline. Therefore, the
shape, twist, and stiffness of the design, kitting and embodiment
retrofit wings needed to be similar process had to be optimized to
to the forward fit. In addition, the minimize aircraft downtime and
reinforcement kit weight could not to be possibly installed in MRO
exceed 200 kilograms, since all facilities.
added weight would have offset
the benefit of the Sharklet device. In summary, the Sharklet retrofit
is a significant multi-disciplinary
The second major challenge was design challenge!
to create a retrofit package that
would be attractive and viable The demonstrator
for customers. Therefore as a
programme
baseline, the retrofit package has
been designed so that the aircraft
retrofit embodiment time would Airbus launched a demonstrator
be minimized and the impact on programme (figure 3) in order to
structural fatigue be reduced. support the design and development
of the Sharklet retrofit solution by
running a series of realistic trials
for the modification.
The advantage of demonstrator
programmes is to offer a retrofit
solution based on feedback gained
from realistic trials, matching a
similar scenario that could be
found in an MRO organisation
environment. Therefore, Airbus’
design department was able to
deliver a design solution based
on the feedback received, which
worked in theory and in practice
(figure 4), either at a customer’s
and/or in MRO facilities.
15
TSAF
Trials on a scrap wing
at Airbus Filton (U.K.)
Figure 3
MSN1 during working party
Figure 4
14
15
TSAF
A320 FAMILY SHARKLET RETROFIT - HUNTING DOWN FUEL BURN
The demonstrator programme PHASE 2:
was split into three embodiment
phases, using scrap aircraft wings The phase 2 aimed for further
to realistically test the embodiment assessing and confirming the
design (figure 5) at various stages retrofit embodiment strategy.
of the design development: This trial supported the detailed
design of the retrofit modifications
THE THREE PHASES and tooling design. During the
series of tests, the design team
PHASE 1: have further investigated and
refined the system’s removal,
During this trial, Airbus’ engineers skin reinforcement and bathtub
have used half a scrap wing. They installation. In addition, Airbus has
have disassembled the outer wing, taken the opportunity to test new
investigated the reinforcement technologies including a hand held
methods and tested the outer wing accurate geometry laser scanner
(bathtub) installation. This phase and an e-drill.
has provided the design team with
valuable feedback in relation to PHASE 3:
the operator’s access, structural
constraints and the embodiment This phase of the embodiment
steps. trial demonstrated the embodiment
strategy by realistically simulating
the Sharklet retrofit using tools
and representative kit parts on a
complete aircraft. This trial has
been timed to allow an accurate
assessment of the downtime
The Sharklet retrofit wing
required for customers to retrofit
reinforcement parts
their aircraft with Sharklets.
Figure 5
Lower Cover:
Replaced skin Rib 25 outboard
new Stringer sections
Upper Cover:
Redesigned with increased
thickness and optimized
stringer geometries
Rib 27:
Indentical to foward fit
Spars:
Replaced from Rib 24,
includes crack stopper
Rib 23 to 26:
Replaced
15
A320 FAMILY SHARKLET RETROFIT - HUNTING DOWN FUEL BURN
15
TSAF
The retrofit kit
Based on the wing reinforcement (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Outer wing reinforcements,
strategy, the retrofit kit includes: including stringer reinforcements
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Sharklets, and outer wing joining parts,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)New outer wing assemblies (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Retrofit embodiment tooling,
including the Sharklet (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Supporting methodology for
attachment ribs and a new top airlines and MRO organisations
The Sharklet retrofit kit skin from position 21 to 27, to be able to install the retrofit
package.
Figure 6
A B
C D
A: Stringer reinforcement
B: Sharklet
C: Top cover
D: Bathtub
CONTACT DETAILS
Simon GALPIN François HUGO
Head of Airframe Development Sharklet Retrofit Engineering
Sharklet Retrofit Project Coordination Manager
Airbus Operations Airbus S.A.S.
Tel: +44 (0)117 936 7517 Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 81 37
simon.galpin@airbus.com francois.hugo@airbus.com
Conclusion
Thanks to improved aerodynamics, and the aircraft downtime must be
Sharklet-equipped aircraft will benefit from reasonable in order for the solution to be
(but not only) reduced fuel burn, lowered interesting for the airlines. Airbus’ engineers
CO emissions and additional passenger have undertaken a long and complex set
2
revenue potential. of trials in order to adapt the Sharklets to
The Sharklet retrofit project is the result a retrofit solution and to empirically test the
of Airbus engineers’ work. Adapting retrofit approach. To date, the project has
the Sharklet solution to a retrofit situation succeeded in facing the challenges.
is not an easy task due to technical Available for the A319 and A320 aircraft
and operational constraints. The wing in the first phase, and the A321 at a later
reinforcement must be light enough to not stage, the first Sharklet-retrofitted aircraft
downgrade the performance improvement is expected to enter into service mid 2014.
16
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
Widespread Fatigue
Damage
A300B: Compliance with ageing
aircraft regulation
In April 1988, an ageing aircraft suffered major The aviation regulation evolved over the last 20
structural damage to its pressurized fuselage, due years, and the latest WFD regulation is effective
to undetected fatigue cracking of the primary from 14th January 2011.
structure. These cracks, at multiple structural Additional activities have been carried out by
locations, grew and linked up quickly to cause Airbus in 2012 to demonstrate its compliance
sudden failure of a large section of the fuselage. with this latest aviation regulation.
Airbus decided then to significantly invest in the It has led to the creation of eight new maintenance
assessment, for over 15 years, of the A300B’s tasks (four new inspections and four new
airframe structure and define the necessary modifications), which have to be implemented in
maintenance actions. The results of this initial the aircraft operators’ maintenance programmes,
Widespread Fatigue Damage (WFD) assessment starting in July 2013.
were published in 2003, in the frame of the The operation of the A300B is ensured for the
Extended Service Goal (ESG) study. decades to come, leading the path for Airbus’
entire fleet.
Nicolas TURREL Didier AURICHE
Structure Analysis Aircraft Airframe & Installation
Policies & Programmes Airworthiness
Airbus S.A.S. Airbus S.A.S.
17
Circumferential joints and
Stringers (MSD/MED)
Latches and Hinges of
Non-plug Doors (MSD/MED)
Stringer to Frame
attachments (MED)
Shear Clip End Fasteners
on Shear Tied Fuselage Frames
(MSD/MED)
Longitudinal Skin Joints, Frames,
and Tear Straps (MSD/MED) Fuselage Frames
(MED)
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
Fatigue cracking of Widespread
metallic structures Fatigue Damage
phenomenon
As the aircraft accumulates Flight
Cycles (FC) or Flight Hours (FH), WFD is characterized by the
Crack initiation from a fastener cracks may initiate in fatigue presence of multiple cracks at
hole (Airbus test specimen) sensitive areas (figure 1). adjacent locations over large
Appropriate inspections and struc- areas (figure 2). Adjacent cracks
Figure 1
tural modifications are defined may interact with each other and
and implemented in the operators’ coalesce in longer cracks (i.e.:
maintenance programme to main- Small cracks coalesce when they
tain the structural strength of the grow up to the point that they
airframe throughout the service life form a single long crack - Multiple
of the aircraft. Site Damage) in a relatively short
period.
Example of structures susceptible
to WFD as per FAA regulation
Figure 3
MSD: Multiple Site Damage
MED: Multiple Element Damage
18
Skin at Runout of Large Doubler
Fuselage, Wing or Empennage (MSD)
Abrupt changes in Web or Skin
Thickness - Pressurized or
Unpressurized Structure (MSD/MED)
Aft Pressure Dome Outer Ring
and Dome Web Splices
(MSD/MED)
Window Surround Structure
(MSD/MED)
Rib-to-Skin Attachments
(MSD/MED)
Typical Wing and Empennage
Construction (MSD/MED)
Wing or Empennage Over-Wing Fuselage
Chordwise Splices (MSD/MED) Attachments (MED)
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
Similarly, the presence of cracks best approach against this phenom-
in multiple elements (Multiple enon is to preclude it. To do so,
Element Damage) may reduce the structure susceptible to WFD
the residual strength capability of (figure 3) shall be modified or
the structure. The use of Non- replaced early enough in service, to
Destructive Techniques (NDT) to avoid the WFD to occur throughout
find small cracks over large areas the service life of the aircraft, up to Multiple Site Damage (MSD)
inspected may not be a reliable and the Limit Of Validity (LOV). evidence from a tested structure
effective solution in service, com-
Figure 2
pared to laboratory conditions for In structural areas where inspec-
the tear down of a test specimen. tions are shown to be reliable, an
inspection phase may be imple-
Due to these specificities, the FAA mented before the modification is
(Federal Aviation Authority) and applied.
industry groups concluded that the
19
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
Ageing aircraft (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)1998: Amendment of the FAA
regulation requiring at least two
regulation
life-time Full-Scale Fatigue
Tests (FSFT) as part of new
In response to the April 1988 issue, Type Certificate (TC) and the
the FAA sponsored a conference establishment of an operational
on ageing aircraft and established a limit. This rule was used
task force representing the interests to certify the A380 model.
of the operators, aircraft manu- (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)2010: Issuance of the FAA
facturers, regulatory authorities WFD regulation requiring
and other aviation representatives. the establishment of a Limit
This task force, which became the Of Validity (LOV) and service
Airworthiness Assurance Working actions required to preclude
The standards defined since more Group (AAWG), specifically rec- the WFD from the fleet.
than 10 years in the frame of the ommended the establishment of (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)The equivalent EASA (European
A300/A310 Family life extension an ageing aircraft programme to Aviation Safety Agency) rules
and compliance to the WFD address long-term ageing airwor- on the WFD are expected to be
regulation in 2012, have already thiness issues in aircraft structures. issued in 2013.
benefitted the assessment of the The Widespread Fatigue Damage
WFD for the metallic structures (WFD) was part of these issues. The WFD regulation is the latest
of all the other Airbus aircraft
step of the evolution of fatigue and
programmes.
The main milestones addressing damage tolerance regulations since
the 1950s. The development of the
WFD were (figure 4):
regulation is shown on the timeline
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)1993: Voluntary commitment
(figure 5), with the retrospective
by the aircraft manufacturers
application of WFD regulation to
to perform a structural evaluation
the already certified aircraft.
for WFD on the models
certified before the introduction
Main milestones addressing of damage tolerance.
Widespread Fatigue Damage
Figure 4
Nov FAA publishes final rules for Widespread Fatigue Damage
2010 FAR §25-132 and FAR §26-5 Subpart C / FAR §121
FAA initial rules for Widespread Fatigue Damage
1998
FAR §25-96
Voluntary commitment by manufacturers
1993
to perform WFD assessment
1988 An aircraft suffered major structural damage
Operational rule
Rule affecting manufacturers
Event
20
Fail Safe
Damage Tolerance
CAR 4b.270
Amdt 25-45
in 1956
in 1978
Full-Scale Fatigue Test
FAR Amdt 25-96
§25.571 in 1998 LOV (WFD)
Amdt 25-132
in 2011
Safe Life
CAR recodified
to FAR in 1964
FAR
§26.21
LOV (WFD) to be retrofitted to already certified aircraft
1950’s 60’s 70’s 80’s 90’s 00’s 2010’s
Full-Scale Fatigue Tests
Voluntary Airbus
WFD analysis
activities
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
Timeline of Fatigue & Damage Tolerance
and WFD evolutions since the 1950’s
Figure 5
Amdt: Amendment
CAR: Civil Air Regulations
FAR: Federal Aviation Regulations
LOV: Limit Of Validity Regulation
WFD: Widespread Fatigue Damage Main concepts
Assessment
for Widespread
Airbus family fleet, from the A300/
Fatigue Damage
A310 Family to the A380 today
(figure 6), and tomorrow for the
Even before the FAR §25.571 A350. This philosophy is aim-
Amendment 96, requiring two ing to detect and ‘find a fix’ for
life-time Full-Scale Fatigue Tests any fatigue cracking issue before
(FSFT), Airbus’ philosophy was it occurs in service. These tests
to anticipate it. Airbus has always constitute the corner stone of the
performed extensive FSFT on each assessment for WFD.
FSFT performed on each Airbus aircraft
programme since 1970's - here for the A380
Figure 6
21
TITLE TITLE - SFATIGUEUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
22
15
TSAF
Airbus initiated activities on the performed to reach an agreement
WFD phenomenon in the early on Airbus’ means to show
1990s. Simulations of multiple compliance to this regulation for
cracking scenarios have been all Airbus aircraft.
developed to predict the initiation
and propagation of cracks in the Thanks to this anticipation
airframe structures susceptible to philosophy, there has been no
WFD. evidence of WFD findings on
On top of the Full-Scale Fatigue Airbus aircraft in service, so far.
Tests (FSFT), a wide range of Furthermore, the establishment
coupon to component tests were of a LOV (Limit Of Validity) of
performed to support and validate the maintenance programme, as
these method developments. requested by the WFD regulation
published in 2010, is already in
Evidence of WFD situations have place for almost 10 years on all
been experienced on longitudinal Airbus aircraft.
and circumferential joints during
the fuselage barrel and FSFT.
WFD regulation
These cases allowed calibrating
the assessment methods used compliance for the
afterwards to design and certify
Fast 45 - Extended Service Goal A300B aircraft
structures. Serial and retrofit
article
modifications were also defined
and implemented on the A300/ An assessment for the WFD was
A310 Family. already performed on the A300/
A310 Family fleet as part of the
In 2011, following the issuance of ESG (Extended Service Goal)
the WFD regulation, Airbus has activities (FAST 45), prior to the
ii n f o r m a t i o n developed a dedicated structure FAR §26.21 issuance.
analysis policy, addressing all The assessment included specific
Steps of the WFD evaluation: steps of the WFD evaluation in analysis, supported by additional
detail (see steps in the side box), coupon and panel tests, tear-
1) I dentify structures
in order to ensure a consistent down of retired high time aircraft,
susceptible to WFD
approach for the entire airframe, and additional tear-down of the
2) P redict when WFD
throughout the Airbus programmes. original certification Full-Scale
is likely to occur
A collaborative work with Fatigue Test specimen.
3) E stablish appropriate
the EASA and FAA has been
maintenance actions
to preclude WFD
dd e f i n i t i o n s
DDeessiiggnn SSeervice Goal (DSG): Extended Service Goal (ESG): Limit Of Validity (LOV):
The reference figure used for design An extension of the DSG, providing The period of time during which it
and justification for Type Certification. five to six additional years’ service. is demonstrated that the WFD will
It reflects the utilisation of the aircraft The ESG exercise for Airbus’ aircraft not occur on the aircraft structure.
model for about 20-25 years of the typically includes in-service fleet Airbus historically introduced a LOV in
expected aircraft service. experience, analysis supported by its maintenance programmes before
new development tests and the WFD the issuance of the WFD regulation,
assessment. applicable to the engineering data that
supports the structural maintenance
programme.
22
23
15
TSAF
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE - A300B: COMPLIANCE TO THE AGEING AIRCRAFT REGULATION
Additional evaluations were (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Identification, development
required and carried out by Airbus and notification to the operators
to be fully in line with FAR §26.21. of the additional required
A complete set of engineering data maintenance actions to preclude
supporting the assessment has been the WFD.
provided by Airbus to the FAA in
the first half of 2012 to comply This assessment for FAR §26.21
with the FAR §26.21. The outcome led to the creation of eight new
of the FAR §26.21 compliance is maintenance tasks (figure 7),
the: which have to be implemented in
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Validation of the LOV the aircraft operators’ maintenance
(established for life extension) programmes, starting July 2013.
in the frame of the WFD
assessment,
Number of maintenance actions created after compliance
with FAR §26.21 to reach the LOV
Figure 7
TYPE LOV ESG (2003) WFD (2012)
A300-B2-1C
A300-B2K-3C 60,000 FC
A300-B2-203
1 MSB (2013)
37 tasks 4 inspections 1 MSB (2014)
created created 1 MSB (2021)
A300-B4-2C 1 MSB (2037)
A300-B4-103 ESG: Extended Service Goal
A300-B4-120 57,000 FC FC: Flight Cycle
A300-B4-203 LOV: Limit Of Validity
A300-B4-220
MSB: Modification Service Bulletin
WFD: Widespread Fatigue Damage
CONTACT DETAILS
Nicolas TURREL Didier AURICHE
Structure Analysis Aircraft Airframe & Installation
Policies & Programmes Airworthiness
Airbus S.A.S. Airbus S.A.S.
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 98 45 Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 48 23
nicolas.turrel@airbus.com didier.auriche@airbus.com
Conclusion
Airbus has already acquired 15 years Since 31st August 2012, the A300B
of experience assessing Widespread is the first Airbus aircraft to be compliant
Fatigue Damage (WFD), and more than with the WFD regulation. The work achieved
20 years knowledge of this phenomenon. sets the standards of approach and
Airbus’ approach, including the Full-Scale methods to be followed in the next years for
Fatigue Tests and the establishment the entire Airbus Family, including any new
of the Limit Of Validity (LOV) in the Type Certification (TC) to come.
maintenance programme, should allow It leads the path for the future compliance
a smooth transition towards compliance of all Airbus aircraft programmes.
with the WFD regulation.
23
15
TSAF
OPTIMIZED SPARE PARTS INVESTMENT - INITIAL PROVISIONING INFLUENCING A350 XWB DEVELOPMENT
Optimized spare parts
investment
Initial Provisioning influencing
A350 XWB development
The development of future aircraft models is One such initiative is the optimization of high
challenged by technological, logistical and value spares’ investments. For the A350 XWB
economical demands as well as the customers’ (Extra Wide Body), Airbus has implemented
specific expectations. However, the development an enhanced process to set up a new spare part
and production phase is not the only challenge recommendation forecast at an earlier stage of
an aircraft manufacturer faces today. Following aircraft development, to ensure that spares-related
the Entry-Into-Service (EIS) of a new aircraft, criteria influence design requirements. Therefore,
a close customer relationship with a high level spares specific Top Level Aircraft Requirements
of trust must be established and maintained. (TLAR) were implemented to reduce the
The introduction of lifecycle support initiatives, investment costs whilst ensuring continuous
to ensure highly efficient operating costs, is operating and maintenance improvements.
fundamental in achieving this.
Stefan TRINKER Daniel SCHWARZER
Integrated Provisioning Services Integrated Provisioning Services
Project Manager Material & Logistics Engineer
New Programmes IP Airbus Operations
Airbus Operations
24
15
TSAF
OPTIMIZED SPARE PARTS INVESTMENT - INITIAL PROVISIONING INFLUENCING A350 XWB DEVELOPMENT
A350 XWB Initial Based on the baseline assumptions
for IP, a Recommended Spare
Provisioning cost
Parts List (RSPL) can be compiled
reduction to determine the typical fleet IP
investment. The RSPL provides
the total recommended investment
Airbus’ A350 XWB Initial Provi- for all Seller Furnished Equipment
sioning (IP) initiative defines all (SFE) and Line Replaceable Units
the targeted aircraft and component (LRUs) installed on the fleet
performances that impact IP costs, (excluding engine, Ground Support
as well as Cost Of Ownership Equipment (GSE) and tools).
(COO). By feeding this spares
relevant information into the For the A350 XWB, highly custo-
Top Level Aircraft Requirements mized airline differentiation parts
(TLAR) during an earlier stage such as In-Flight Entertainment
of the A350 XWB development, (IFE) and seats are handled through
it ensures that the targets are met a new supplier support agreement
throughout the design process named ACS (Airbus Contracted
and mature data can be cascaded Supplier).
towards the suppliers in the
designated specifications and in Due to the ‘ACS Selection
accordance with the contractual Agreement’, the customer has the
agreements. advantage of being responsible for
selecting the ACS, the product
For new aircraft programmes, it and its features in accordance with
is challenging to estimate the IP the relevant Aircraft Description
budget owing to a lack of in-service Document (ADD) customization
data and experience from new sections, whilst Airbus has the
cutting edge technologies. For the contractual assurance of quality,
A350 XWB, Airbus therefore uses on-time delivery and installation
experience in operational support of these ACS parts. For a complete
to set a standardized and verified data set, ACS parts will be listed
baseline against a similar twin- within A350 XWB Recommended
engine aircraft with similar long Spare Parts Lists, but because
range operational requirements: customers negotiate directly with
The A330-300. This baseline was ACSs, Airbus desists from any
defined as a typical 10-aircraft recommendations.
fleet of A330-300s with identical
standard configurations and typical The total investment target defined
utilisation parameters. in the TLAR for an A350 XWB
fleet will be reduced by around
5% compared to one composed of Description of the ACS
A330-300. contractual relationship
Figure 1
(cid:42)(cid:92)(cid:90)(cid:91)(cid:86)(cid:84)(cid:76)(cid:89)
ACS Selection Aircraft Purchase
Agreement Agreement
The Purchase Agreement
remains between
Airbus and the customer
(cid:40)(cid:42)(cid:58)(cid:3)(cid:15)(cid:90)(cid:92)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:83)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:16) ACS contact (cid:40)(cid:80)(cid:89)(cid:73)(cid:92)(cid:90)
25
15
TSAF
OPTIMIZED SPARE PARTS INVESTMENT - INITIAL PROVISIONING INFLUENCING A350 XWB DEVELOPMENT
The global investment has been This new AESS detects possible
broken down into individual external dangerous factors that can
targets per ATA (Air Transport have an impact on the aircraft’s
Association) chapter. With the flight path and reports them on
A350 XWB’s advanced techno- one single device. Safety relevant
logies, a number of systems feature factors include weather conditions
new designs, functions or materials. or terrain proximity.
CPIOM reduced from three to two Therefore, they also have different
on the A350 XWB programme performances compared to current HOW IP CAN INFLUENCE PART
technologies, with a direct impact DEVELOPMENT
on the required investment. For
this reason each ATA chapter has For the A380, as well as the
been monitored by the A350 XWB upcoming A350 XWB, a new
CPIOM-H
CPIOM-J
p
th
r
e
o g
ta
ra
rg
m
e
m
t.
e management to meet I
(I
n
M
te
A
gr
)
a
c
t
o
e
n
d
c ep
M
t h
o
a
d
s
u
b
l
e
a
e
r
n de
A
v
v
e
i
l
o
op
n
e
ic
d
s
.
In contrast to conventional
AN EXAMPLE WITH ATA 34 avionics, the IMA principle is to
- NAVIGATION CHAPTER provide shared hardware resources
for computing and communication
An example (shown in figure 3) in functions. The Core Processing
achieving the reduced IP investment Input/Output Module (CPIOM), as
targets is the re-engineering of part of the IMA, hosts avionics’
the environmental surveillance applications and processes data to
functionality. In comparison to the execute avionics’ functions. These
A330-300 IP baseline, consisting CPIOMs are spread between two
of several individual reporting configuration types: H & J. They
systems, the A350 XWB features a differ in their definition of physical
highly reliable, integrated Aircraft interfaces; CPIOMs of the same
Environment Surveillance System cluster can be exchanged without
(AESS) with fewer components. the need of a software upload.
A350 IP target cost objective
The initial engineering feasibility
Figure 3
study for the A350 XWB proposed
an uneven distribution between
these two CPIOM models with
an effective outcome of three
recommended spare modules per
aircraft.
AA333300--330000 ssttaannddaarrdd NNeeww AA335500 XXWWBB ssttaannddaarrdd Due to the new spares’ TLAR
settings, this distribution has been
re-analysed with the conclusion
Atmosphere data
Weather radar system that an even distribution could
reduce the amount of recommended
Aircraft modules, reducing the investment
In-air traffic data /Air Traffic Control (ATC) Environment by one third.
Traffic Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) Surveillance
System
(AESS)
Terrain data
Around 30%
Ground Proximity Warning Computer (GPWC) IP investment savings
due to one single system interface
26
selahT
fo
ysetruoC
15
TSAF
OPTIMIZED SPARE PARTS INVESTMENT - INITIAL PROVISIONING INFLUENCING A350 XWB DEVELOPMENT
A350 XWB facilitated the validation and
verification process amongst
general
stakeholders (figure 4/[A]). For
development the A350 XWB, all contracted
ii n f o r m a t i o n
suppliers are now obliged to send
and IP
preliminary LRU information TThhee MMaatteerrrriiaal Readiness Conference
as well as their updates. These (MRC) is part of a comprehensive
In comparison to previous aircraft Maintenance Maintainability Material Readiness Roadmap (MRR)
programmes, the IP target cost for Evaluations (MME) documents helping to prepare a smooth Entry-
Top Level Aircraft Requirements are verified and used for initial Into-Service for each customer.
(TLAR) of the A350 XWB has recommendation calculations. The MRC represents a combined
been implemented during an early Once the Critical Design Review meeting between customers,
stage of development. Due to this (CDR) has been successfully top-tier-suppliers and Airbus to
early integration, spares’ criteria passed, all RSPL-relevant part present and discuss all potential
such as the IP investment can now attributes are contractually fixed Initial Provisioning related topics in
be handled as design requirements (figure 4/[B]). detail with special attention to Line
for the A350 XWB. Replaceable Units which account
Because new technological devel- for roughly 80% of the investment
VALIDATION AND VERIFICATION opments and highly integrated value, although they only represent
ENSURES A SUCCESSFUL MATERIAL aircraft components are usually 20% of recommended spare parts.
READINESS CONFERENCE impacted by a variety of changes,
a high number of modifications are
The analysis of spare part pro- to be expected.
visioning for the A330-300 has
identified the parts which have the Airbus must secure validated sup-
greatest impact on the IP target cost plier information to support the
of system and cabin related Line Material Readiness Conferences
Replaceable Units (LRU). with customers (figure 4/[C]). For
this target, Airbus has to approve
The A330-300 is used as a supplier offers according to the
reference to represent the basic Supplier Support Conditions
quantity of expected vendor parts (SSC) agreements prior to the first
for the A350 XWB Recommended Material Readiness Conference.
Spare Parts List (RSPL), including These SSC contracts are regulat-
nacelle components. Engineering ing the main spares’ provisioning
and operability expertise gained related items (e.g.: commercial and
over previous programmes has technical deliverables). Milestones for an aircraft
development
Figure 4
Entry
Product idea: Feasibility End Design
Into
A350 XWB agreement of concept freeze
Service
Integration
Feasibility Concept Design
and qualification
A B C
Milestones spares provisioning
Setting of TLARs
A
and IP target cost document
B Verification and validation
Material Readiness
C
Conference (MRC)
27
Ensuring suppliers’
deliverables
For the A350 XWB’s advanced (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Guarantee early integration
technologies, Airbus has con- and collaboration between
tracted numerous new suppliers. Airbus and external A350 XWB
A dedicated process has been set in stakeholders to consistently
place to ensure that new suppliers maintains awareness of
will be able to fulfil their contrac- deliverable deadlines, dates
tual obligations regarding quality and formats,
and delivering on time. (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Review the current status,
discuss discrepancies,
In addition to routine support
change requests and organize
measures (e.g. customized requests
a homogenous way forward,
on Part Number level, superior
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Communicate at the right
maturity meetings, etc.), Airbus
time with the people that are
also conducts Initial Provisioning
responsible for ensuring the
workshops with suppliers to:
expected results.
15
TSAF
OPTIMIZED SPARE PARTS INVESTMENT - INITIAL PROVISIONING INFLUENCING A350 XWB DEVELOPMENT
CONTACT DETAILS
Stefan TRINKER Daniel SCHWARZER
Integrated Provisioning Services Integrated Provisioning Services
Project Manager Material & Logistics Engineer
New Programmes IP Airbus Operations
Airbus Operations Tel: +49 (0) 40 5076 1242
Tel: +49 (0) 40 5076 2446 daniel.schwarzer@airbus.com
Conclusion
stefan.trinker@airbus.com
In an ideal world the variety of information In detail, Airbus strived to optimize
provided by suppliers, customers the spares’ provisioning process by using
and the manufacturer can easily be spares specific Top Level Aircraft
consolidated and used for validated spares’ Requirements as a design basis and also
investment recommendation calculations. by introducing new ways of integrating
But a high number of stakeholders stakeholders for data validation and
and interfaces significantly increase verification. This promising new approach
complexity. For this reason, Airbus decided will secure a higher maturity level
to pursue a different strategy for the Initial of the Recommended Spare Parts List
Provisioning development of the A350 XWB. for the first A350 XWB customers in 2013,
with a smooth Entry-Into-Service.
28
15
TSAF
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
Managing aircraft
security
A new challenge for the air
transportation community
The most important topics for the air transportation These new functions require extended connectivity
community today are safety and security. While between aircraft systems, the aircraft itself and the
physical security threat management remains ground segments. Aircraft functions and ground
a major challenge, the management of cyber dependent functions are more and more supported
security is a new and growing objective for all by commercial off-the-shelf software, products
stakeholders of the air transport industry. The new and technologies. To manage these potential new
generations of aircraft integrate functions for crews threats, airworthiness authorities have set specific
and passengers that rely on Information Systems obligations for aircraft manufacturers.
(IS) that could be targeted by cyber threats.
Pascal ANDREI Gernot LADSTAETTER Isabelle DUFEU
Head of Aircraft Security Head of Aircraft In-Service Aircraft Security
Airbus S.A.S. Security Special Projects Manager
Airbus S.A.S. Airbus S.A.S.
29
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
15
TSAF
Setting the picture Evolutions of the legacy pro-
grammes towards more connec-
tivity and more IT (Information
Everybody knows about traditional
Technology) on board-based
threats and how the diversity and
solutions are assessed by a
increasing intensity of malicious
dedicated aircraft security orga-
acts may target aircraft or
nisation to ensure that aircraft
passengers (figure 1). Regularly,
security is not jeopardised.
press articles relate cyber attacks
against air/ground communication
Aircraft safety
systems, or increasing numbers of
laser cockpit illuminations reported versus aircraft
by airlines.
security
All Airbus aircraft, by design,
are compliant with their own To avoid any misunderstanding,
applicable requirements. Airbus it is key to cover the scope and
has demonstrated through design, definitions:
activities and processes that the
airworthiness authorities’ security Aircraft security:
requirements are fulfilled for the Concerns the prevention of
whole aircraft lifecycle. For the deliberate malicious acts that
A350, experiences from the A380 may affect the aircraft and/or the
as well as industry standardisation passengers (hacking, malicious
activities have been used to ensure code, unruly passenger, hijacking,
streamlined security solutions. explosive devices, etc.).
Aircraft safety:
Concerns the reduction and control
Potential source of treats of risks associated with aircraft
operations to an acceptable level.
Figure 1
Information system
threat vectors
Physical security threats Terrorist, hijacker,
unruly passenger, stowaway
SATCOM
Satellite IED, EMI,
NRBC agents
Communication
Passengers
Aircraft theft Gatelink (Plugs & Wi-Fi)
on ground (wireless) Ground threats
sabotage ACARS
Wide area (HF VHF Satcom)
Network/Internet
Airport
Air/Ground link Service provider
networks
Local area
network
Air navigation Maintenance Airline Passenger
Manufacturer
operation operations operations services
ACARS: Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System / EMI: Electromagnetic Interference / HF: High Frequency
IED: Improvised Explosive Device / NRBC agents: Nuclear Radiological Biological Chemical / SATCOM: Satellite Communication
VHF: Very High Frequency / Wi-Fi: Wireless Fidelity
30
15
TSAF
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
Physical security
Examples of physical security features
features
Figure 2
One of the physical security
The reinforced cockpit door is a mandatory feature for all aircraft
concerns is to protect the aircraft
and its passengers by deterring or
preventing non-authorized people
from particularly sensitive areas of
the aircraft.
It addresses a large scope of poten-
tial threats, including:
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Aircraft seizure for blackmail
purposes or for use as a weapon,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)The use of Improvised Explosive
Devices (IED) or incendiary
devices taken on board,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Aircraft sabotage on ground
(unsecured aircraft and/or
The privacy door is an option proposed to airlines on wide-body
unsupervised parking stands), aircraft to create a secondary barrier to the cockpit area
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Aircraft ground attack
(MANPADS, laser, etc.),
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Contamination of crew and
passengers with biological
or chemical agents,
In figure 2, you will find some of
the security features that have been
developed and implemented to
answer the operators’ needs over
and above regulatory standards,
to mitigate physical threats such
as unruly passengers, hijackers,
sabotage, etc.
Cockpit Door Surveillance System (CDSS)
Camera
Camera
Keypad
Camera
The Emergency Call Alerting System (option)
may be used to alert the cockpit in case
of an incident in the cabin
31
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
15
TSAF
Also, modifying current designs A typical example of cyber
can facilitate routine security tasks threats that can be generic or very
such as cabin searches (figure 3). specific to an aircraft function is a
malicious code specifically crafted
This activity also covers research to infiltrate or damage a system,
projects (examples in figure 4) in software or equipment (viruses,
Overhead luggage compartment
order to anticipate the evolution worms, Trojan horses, backdoors,
design modification to facilitate
Fcaigbuinre s 3earches using a mirror of threats, to answer operator spyware, etc.). As a result, the need
needs and to continuously improve of protection of Field Loadable
Figure 3 current solutions. Software against corruption is
paramount.
Cyber security The cyber threat is inherent to IT
systems, and may lead to successful
threats
intrusions on systems with restricted
accesses (unauthorized system
Cyber security concerns the access: Information modification
protection of the aircraft Infor- or destruction, corruption of data,
mation System, the aircraft/ etc.) with potential consequences
ground segments and aircraft-to- on aircraft safety, Operational
aircraft communication against Reliability or the airline’s brand
electronic threats. The threats and image.
considered are human actions
(purposeful, casual or accidental Security standards
actions) using unauthorized access
leading to disclosure, corruption or
Airbus ensures that its aircraft are
destruction of information.
designed, manufactured, produced
This type of threat covers various
and delivered in accordance with
areas of on-ground and/or in-flight
all applicable security legislation
communications systems:
and regulations.
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Shipment of software from
ICAO started addressing avia-
suppliers to Airbus,
tion security explicitly at the
gg l o s s a r y (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Maintenance connectivity
1963 Tokyo Convention, and
(portable data loaders,
AACCAARRSS:: AAiirrcraft Communication continues to develop standards
troubleshooting equipment,
Addressing and Reporting System and recommended practices as
USB key, IT cards, etc.),
HF: High Frequency set out in Annex 17. In 2001,
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Aircraft/ground wireless
IS: Information System the menace changed in terms of
links (Gate-link, telephony,
IT: Information Technology nature and intensity. In the wake
WIFI, etc.),
SATCOM: Satellite Communications of the 9/11 events, the aeronautical
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Aircraft/ground connectivity
USB: Universal Serial Bus community realized that an aircraft
(ACARS, HF, VHF, SATCOM,
VHF: Very High Frequency can also be used as a weapon of
etc.),
WIFI: Wireless Fidelity mass destruction.
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Cabin links accessible
These incidents generated reactions
to passengers (cabin WIFI,
from the air transportation
plugs, etc.),
community actors (aircraft manu-
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Etc.
facturers, airlines, airports,
Security research projects
airworthiness authorities, etc.).
Figure 4
One of the first technical
responses provided by the aviation
Research on the use of biometry to improve aircraft access control for crew
community was a regulation via
mandatory requirements such
as the reinforced cockpit doors
(figure 2).
Since then, many security features
are now proposed to operators as
options to complement the security
of their fleet.
32
This first step has been followed International
by a deep reflection on air
collaboration
transportation security in order
to anticipate threats and mitigate
efficiently the associated risks. All actors in the air transport
industry (figure 6) must cooperate
Security is a continuously evolving to define and orientate the air
topic. For example, in December transportation security in a
2006 the EASA asked Airbus to consistent manner by:
create a dedicated organisation (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Sharing on threat definition
to manage aircraft IS security (attack levels and impacts),
activities. An aircraft security team (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Sharing on interoperating rules,
has thus been structured and set (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Defining harmonized processes
up for the Type Certification (TC) and methods for design,
of the A380. Today, dedicated development and operation
organisations are composed of of security features
specialists and experts with dual (cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Defining and validating roles
competencies in Security and and responsibilities.
Aircraft design, enabling them to All aircraft manufacturers
address all security risks from an collaborate on a non-competitive
end-to-end view. basis in order to enhance air
transportation security.
A ‘in-depth
Airbus has developed its presence
defence’ approach
and credibility on an international
level by proposing means to
The security of the aircraft is comply with future regulations.
based on the ‘in-depth security’ For example, Airbus actively
principle. Instead of having one participates to several Standar-
single barrier, different circled disation Bodies’ committees
layers of defence are placed including but not limited to ECAC,
(figure 5) between the threats and EUROCONTROL-SET, etc., in
the aircraft (the aircraft itself being order to steer and coordinate the
the very last line of defence). The development of aircraft security
overall security depends on the technical standards and rules, and
weakest link of the security chain also to promote Airbus’ vision on
and the cooperation between all of air transportation system security
the actors within this chain. issues.
(cid:59)(cid:79)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:90)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:76)(cid:3)(cid:84)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:80)(cid:78)(cid:72)(cid:91)(cid:76)(cid:75)
(cid:94)(cid:80)(cid:91)(cid:79)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:3)(cid:84)(cid:92)(cid:83)(cid:91)(cid:80)(cid:20)(cid:73)(cid:72)(cid:89)(cid:89)(cid:80)(cid:76)(cid:89)(cid:3)(cid:72)(cid:87)(cid:87)(cid:89)(cid:86)(cid:72)(cid:74)(cid:79)
15
TSAF
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
gg l o s s a r y
AANNSSPP:: AAiirr NNavigation Service
Provider
ASFP: Aircraft Security Focal Points
ASUP: Aircraft Security User Panel
ATM: Air Traffic Management
AVSEC: Aviation Security
EASA: European Aviation Safety
Agency
ECAC: European Civil Aviation
Conference
EUROCAE: European Organisation
for Civil Aviation Equipment
EUROCONTROL-SET: European
Organisation for the Safety of Air
Navigation - Security Evaluation
Team
IATA: International Air Transport
Association
ICAO: International Civil Aviation
Organisation
ICCAIA: International Coordinating
Council of Aerospace Industries
Associations
NCI: National Critical
Infrastructures
SESAR: Single European Sky
ATM Research
WG: Working Group
Different circled layers of defence
Figure 5
33
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
Airbus chairs the EUROCAE Customer
Working Group number 72 -
collaboration
‘Aeronautical Systems Security’,
and is a major player of security is key
in SESAR.
Various topics are shared with The security management of
government security agencies in-service aircraft must rely on
such as the identification and a collaborative effort between all
definition of threats (intelligence stakeholders. Airbus is committed
sharing), validation of aircraft to helping airlines to maintain
security levels, exchange of the security level of aircraft in
expertise, recommendations for an evolving threat environment,
new or improved security features, and aircraft operators also have
awareness on Airbus aircraft to comply with their respective
security, etc. All this includes regulations. As such, Airbus
the collaboration with local performs a continuous monitoring
governmental security agencies on of vulnerabilities that may affect
an ad-hoc basis and with selected aircraft systems and informs
international law enforcement aircraft operators immediately if a
units. critical vulnerability is identified.
International collaboration is a key Airbus meets regularly with its
activity in order to set the global customers’ aviation security
picture of the Air Transportation departments, either in bilateral
Industry in a common and meetings or during a yearly
consistent manner. conference called the Aircraft
Security User Panel in order to
discuss emerging threats and
potential solutions.
15
TSAF
Aircraft Security User Panel
(ASUP)
ASUP is a non-commercial
conference that gathers Airbus
operators security decision
makers as well as key stake-
holders of the air transportation
community, in order to learn
and exchange ideas on the
implementation of effective and
practical aviation security.
The objectives of this panel are
to:
(cid:201)(cid:1)I(cid:1)nform aircraft operators about
current and future Airbus
features
(cid:201)(cid:1)P(cid:1)rovide and collect feedback
(cid:201)(cid:1)D(cid:1)evelop a common vision
(cid:201)(cid:1)D(cid:1)etermine and prioritize
customer expectations
(cid:201)(cid:1)A(cid:1)ddress specific topics linked
to future enhancements
(cid:201)(cid:1)D(cid:1)evelop and animate
a network of airlines’
professionals
Security actors of the air transport industry
Governments
Figure 6
Reinforce
Airbus position
EADS and vision Regulators
Enable
Establish and
stronger
enhance synergies
involvement
& cooperation
Steer and
coordinate AAIIRRCCRRAAFFTT SSEECCUURRIITTYY Challenge
development of IINNTTEERRNNAATTIIOONNAALL respond to
aircraft security AA regulation
Standardisation CCOOOOPPEERRAATTIIOONN Airworthiness
management requirements
Bodies Autorities (AA)
standards
Support Communicate
in-service fleet Airbus position
and security needs on security needs
AiTS
Airlines
stakeholders
34
35
15
TSAF
MANAGING AIRCRAFT SECURITY - A NEW CHALLENGE FOR THE AIR TRANSPORTATION COMMUNITY
Risk management Airbus has developed a
comprehensive and dedicated
aircraft Security Management
The implementation of new
System based on recognized
practices in risk management
international ISO standards, and
is a major challenge for the air
transportation community today. also offers specific solutions ii n f o r m a t i o n
for implementation, enhancing
Whilst physical security threat
the performance of operational Airbus provides a security
management remains a large
physical and cyber security by handbook to operators that
activity, the management of
providing: collects security procedures
information system security is a
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Expertise in the management to complement the aircraft’s
new and growing objective for
of aviation security risks, technical security measures for
all stakeholders. Airbus strongly
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Support for the implementation specific security risks. Ad-hoc
recommends that all actors
of security procedures, security procedures are issued via
in the industry implement a
(cid:201)(cid:1)(cid:1)Assistance in getting local dedicated information bulletins.
comprehensive and standardized
operational approval from Contact: ac_sec@airbus.com
Security Management System
airworthiness authorities.
covering both physical and cyber
security.
CONTACT DETAILS Gernot LADSTAETTER
Head of Aircraft In-Service Security
Pascal ANDREI Airbus S.A.S.
Head of Aircraft Security Tel: +49 (0)-40 7436 2682
Airbus S.A.S. gernot.ladstaetter@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 18 07
pascal.andrei@airbus.com Isabelle DUFEU
Aircraft Security - Special Project Manager
Airbus S.A.S.
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 07 60
isabelle.dufeu@airbus.com
Conclusion
In the future, security and the associated throughout their lifecycle and the Airbus
risk management systems will be security management system.
confronted with increasingly complex, Airbus also invests in Research
dynamic and smart threats targeting & Technology, in order to continuously
multiple aspects such as people, provide up to date tailored solutions
aircraft systems, operations or air traffic against future threats emerging from
management systems. a constantly changing environment.
In order to mitigate or eliminate the risk The global security of the aircraft also
of such threats, the aircraft security requires international collaboration
architecture and capabilities - technical between all the actors of the air
and organisational - as provided by transportation chain, and Airbus was the
Airbus enable operators to benefit first to provide a dedicated forum for its
from a seamless and dedicated risk operators called the Aircraft Security User
management system. Airbus aircraft Panel. Despite all the advances in terms
designs incorporate integrated security of layered protection, the aircraft is and
features that need to be maintained will always remain the last line of defence.
35
AIRPORT TAXIING - A NEW ERA RELIEVING ANIMALS
15
TSAF
After the wehee-Taxi, the moo-Taxi, it is now time for the eTaxi.
- “But what on Earth could that be? What does the “e” stand for
and does it have anything to do with an elephant?
- No, you’re cold.
- An eagle?
- Nice try, but try again.
- An ermine?
- Come on!
- An electric eel?
- Close, very close.”
The ‘e’ stands for electriccc...
The draught animals
can leave for a deserved
retirement. Thanks
to eTaxi, taxiing
on runways will be
electrically operated
saving considerable
fuel loads
and contributing
to a reduction
of CO emissions,
2
as explained
in this FAST magaziiinnneee
(article eTaxi: Page 2-1000))).
Messerschmitt
Me 163 Komet
Fokker Dr.I
36
egatireH
etaroproC
SDAE
fo ysetruoc
serutciP
All the FAST magazines
are available free-of-access on: WWW.AIRBUS.COM/SUPPORT/PUBLICATIONS
We hope that you have enjoyed
yourselves in answering this quiz
and thank you again for your
encouragements and interest
in FAST magazines!
The 50 winners will be drawn
and will soon receive their Airbus
giveaway prize.
Answers
to the FAST 50 magazine quiz
1) When was the first FAST magazine published? 6) Which system on Airbus aircraft provides protection
(clue in FAST 1) against fuel tank fire and explosion? (clue in FAST 44)
A. 1979 A. Fuel Tank Extinguishing System (FTES)
B. 1983 B. Fire and Explosion Prevention System (FEPS)
C. 1989 C. Fuel Tank Inerting System (FTIS)
D. 1995 D. Fuel Valve Bypass System (FVBS)
2) What is the wing span of an A310? (clue in FAST 5) 7) What happened on 1 February, 2008? (clue in FAST 46)
A. 41.5 m A. A irbus completed a flight non-stop around the world
B. 42.1 m with an A380
C. 43.9 m B. A irbus completed the world’s first ever flight by
D. 44.6 m a commercial jet (A380) using synthetic liquid
jet-fuel made from natural gas (GTL)
3) What is the advantage of the Airbus Fly-By-Wire C. A irbus launched its new A350XWB programme
system? (clue in FAST 9) D. A irbus sold its 5,000th A320 Family aircraft
A. It saves weight
B. It reduces complexity 8) What is the name of the tool especially developed by
the Airbus Structures Test Domain for the A320 impact
C. It increases the aircraft reliability
calibration campaign, which is now used for the impact
D. All of the above answers are correct
threat evaluation for the A350XWB composite fuselage?
(clue in FAST 48)
4) I am an engineering tool used to design, integrate,
optimize and validate vital aircraft systems such as A. MICKEY
the Electrical Generation, Hydraulic Generation, Flight B. RATATOUILLE
Control System, Auto-Flight System, Warning System C. YOGI
(ECAM) and the Centralized Fault and Maintenance
D. GUISMOT
System. What am I? (clue in FAST 24)
A. The Test Bed 9) The radio altimeter is used to provide an accurate
B. The Iron Bird height above ground level when the aircraft is between?
C. The Flying Prototype (clue in FAST 49)
D. The Virtual Fly Test A. 0 and 1,000 feet
B. 0 and 2,000 feet
5) Airbus received acceptance of the A380 Maintenance C. 0 and 2,500 feet
Review Board Report (MRBR) from the European
D. 0 and 3,000 feet
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) on which date?
(clue in FAST 38)
10) What is called the innovative cabin option for the
A. 23 December 2005 A320 Family aircraft? (clue in FAST 50)
B. 17 September 2006
A. Space-Flex
C. 12 November 2007
B. Spice-Flex
D. 4 July 2008
C. Space-Flux
D. Spice-Flux
A derivative of a 1960’s design (even if it has been amended from
time to time), it’s no wonder the 737 MAX is suffering from jet lag.
The 737 MAX will probably be the last non fl y-by-wire commercial
aircraft the industry will ever see. An aircraft family unto itself with
low commonality with other Boeing products.
It has a narrow fuselage which offers comfort based on a 1960’s
standard, pivoting passenger doors, 17 inch seat width and no
wide-aisle option, required for today’s fast turn-around times.
It also has no containerised cargo, small cumbersome inward
opening doors, and constrained engine optimisation possibilities
due to its 1960’s undercarriage design. You don’t even get a
choice of engines.
By the time the 737 MAX is expected to arrive in 2017, it will
be the 50th anniversary of the 737 fi rst fl ight.
The 737 MAX. Based on a 1960’s design. A true case of jet lag!
.skramedart
deretsiger
era
seman
tcudorp
sti
dna
ogol
sti
,subriA
.ynapmoc
gnieoB
eht
fo
skramedart
era
XAM
737
dna
737
ehT L A G
J E T
There are some very good reasons why our A320neo Family is
leading the single-aisle jet market and is meeting all of today’s
modern airline needs.
Innovative design, and advanced fl y-by-wire with renowned Airbus
commonality results in superior fuel effi ciency, reduced noise and
less environmental impact, alongside low maintenance costs and
the lowest operating costs per seat.
The A320 Family is the most spacious single-aisle family, offering
a wider cabin, wider aisles, more overhead storage and greater
comfort, even in economy. It also offers unique cargo capabilities
to carry standard containers.
The A320neo Family has uncompromising engine effi ciency. It has
the largest fan diameter and highest by-pass ratio. Combined with
our proven Sharklet technology, this means at least 15% less fuel
burn than today’s A320 Family, and less fuel burn per seat than
the so called ‘fi rm concept’ 737 MAX. So it appears that size
does matter.
It is no surprise that the NEO is the fastest selling aircraft in the
history of civil aviation. With more than 1,500 orders in less than
two years the A320neo Family has captured 60% of its market.
