E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
5
0
0
2
Y
L
U
J
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
63TSAF
36
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Publisher:Bruno Piquet
Editor:Kenneth Johnson
Graphic Designer:Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Customer Services Communications
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
E-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer Escourbiac
FAST may be read on Internet
http://www.content.airbusworld.com/SITES/Customer_services/index.html
under Customer Services/Publications
ISSN 1293-5476
Airbus Customer Services
©AIRBUS S.A.S. 2005. All rights reserved
No other intellectual property rights are granted by the delivery of this Magazine than the right
to read it,for the sole purpose of information.This Magazine and its content shall not be
modified and its images shall not be reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus.
This Magazine and the material it contains shall not,in whole or in part,be sold,rented,
distributed or licensed to any third party.The information contained in this Magazine may vary
over time because of future factors that may affect the accuracy of information herein.Airbus
assumes no obligation to update any information contained in this Magazine.When additional
information is required,Airbus S.A.S.can be contacted to provide further details.Airbus,its
logo and product names are registered trademarks.Airbus S.A.S.shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and of the materials it contains,
even if Airbus S.A.S.has been advised of the likelihood of such damages This issue of FAST has been printed on paper
produced without using chlorine,to reduce
Photographs by Airbus France: Jean Jodar (page 5) waste and help conserve natural resources.
exm company: Hervé Bérenger, Hervé Goussé and Philippe Masclet Every little helps!
1
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
PERFORMANCE AND OPERATIONS CONFERENCE A300/A310 FAMILY TECHNICAL SYMPOSIUM
IN BANGKOK, THAILAND, 4 - 8 APRIL IN LISBON, PORTUGAL, 14 -18 NOVEMBER AFFC - Auto Fuel Feed Controller 2
Our vision for the EFB (Electronic Flight Bag) and its sup- Preparation for this technical symposium is already in Upgrading your Airbus fleet for additional
port, how to deal with Required Navigation Performance progress. There will be presentations on actual in-service
maintainability
and the way to fly RNAV approaches were announced and issues affecting the A300/A310 Family programme as well
Daniel Percy
discussed at this symposium. Other topics included: our as subjects of more general interest.
legacy document project, the first A380 Flight Crew For information, contact your local resident customer sup-
Low fuel temperatures 5
Operating Manual delivery, the A350 status, our vision on port manager. Agenda and participation forms will be sent
CNS/ATM (Communication Navigation Surveillance/Air out in September. Basics,principles of operations and a new software
Traffic Management), our concept and new tools for oper- tool for predictions
ational cost management and our vision of safety related HUMAN FACTORS SYMPOSIUM Lars Kornstaedt
equipment that will be fitted on our future aircraft. IN MADRID, SPAIN, 22 - 24 NOVEMBER
300 flight operations specialists from 86 airlines and about
Airbus will continue the dialogue with its operators at this AACT - Airbus Active learning and 12
50 representatives from 19 vendors, associations and
symposium, discussing human factors aspects with practi- Competence focused Training
authorities participated in this very well appreciated event.
cal and operational perspectives on:
A new approach to maintenance training
• Flight operations (environmental, safety, pure ops
TECHNICAL DATA SUPPORT & SERVICES Christèle Bertrand
e.g. procedures, philisophy, systems)
SYMPOSIUM IN ATHENS, GREECE, 25-29 APRIL • Maintenance (safety, CRM, organization, procedures,
T2CAS - Terrain and Traffic Collision 16
The modular concept of our advanced consultation tool manuals)
'AirN@v' was announced at this symposium. The concept • Cabin operations (safety, CRM, organization, Cover: Low fuel temperature country Avoidance System
will give seamless one-stop-access to aircraft documenta- procedures, mass travel, medical aspects) Upgrading your aircraft by combining
tion and significant gains in efficiency. It will also support • Training (to flight operations, maintenance, TCAS and TAWS in one unit
our move to delivering 'Service-Oriented Data' in the com- cabin operations, to human factors) Christine Vigier
ing years. There will be no rupture in the use of standards • ATC (environmental, safety, pure operations
and delivery of data, as this will be totally transparent to e.g. procedures, philisophy, systems)
A new concept for Service Bulletins
technical data end-users. It was also announced that in line
with Airbus' policy of applying new technology applica- Addressing airline expectations for 21
tions for existing aircraft programmes, Airbus has launched Service Bulletins
AirN@v for all A310 and A300-600 fleet customers. Annick Pedron
The symposium was much appreciated and customers fully
endorsed Airbus migration from outdated media to full dig- RFID - Radio Frequency IDentification 28
ital data application. Supporting the aircraft supply chain
Andreas Teufel
A320 FAMILY SYMPOSIUM
IN RHODES, GREECE, 23 -27 MAY
Customer Services 35
This had a record participation of 345: 167 from 91 airlines,
47 from 16 vendors and representatives of the Maintenance Around the clock...Around the world
Repair and Overhaul Network. Evaluation forms gave a
very high satisfaction level and, overall, we saw customers A double-decker of fifty years ago……. 36
satisfied with A320 Family performance.
The symposium gave an opportunity to exchange views and
allowed Airbus to optimize its focus on operators' main
issues. Customers acknowledged our improvements of
their main concerns with projects such as Forum for
Airlines Issues Resolution (FAIR), New Service Bulletin
Concept, maintenance costs, Time To Get a Fix and also
appreciated demonstrations of the latest A320 Family
enhancements and the ongoing product evolution.
AFFC - UPGRADING YOUR AIRBUS FLEET FOR ADDITIONAL MAINTAINABILITY
3
63
TSAF
AFFC - UPGRADING YOUR AIRBUS FLEET FOR ADDITIONAL MAINTAINABILITY
AFFC
Auto Fuel Feed Controller
Upgrading your Airbus fleet for additional maintainability
3
63
TSAF
The Auto Fuel of transient aircraft conditions.
Airbus and Goodrich Fuel and
Feed Controller
Utility Systems have therefore
AFFC location
incorporated additional and
Replacing all the relays of the cur- improved logic within the AFFCs
rent system, except for six essential software. The result is a reduction
for supply of power to the pumps, in the number of indicated auto-
the AFFC is a line replaceable feed failures, and a subsequent
digital computer. It controls the decrease in maintenance workload.
inner and center fuel tank boost
pumps, and the water scavenge When genuine autofeed system
pumps. As with the current system, failures are indicated, the AFFCs
the outer tank pumps are controlled BITE (Built In Test Equipment)
independently of the AFFC. function provides vastly improved
assistance to maintenance crews
In order to provide automatic con- to troubleshoot the fault. The
trol, the AFFC takes inputs from AFFCs BITE has two levels of
the aircraft power circuits, flight status indication, one for line
deck push button switches and the maintenance and one for base
refuel panel. System inputs also maintenance personnel.
come from the inner and center
tank level sensors, the fuel quanti- At line maintenance level, LEDs
Photo courtesy of Air Hongkong ty computer and pump feedback (Light Emitting Diodes) on the
TS codes
signals. front panel of the AFFC provide
fault codes, which indicate the sta-
The AFFC has been designed to tus of the autofeed system, both
interface with the existing aircraft internally and externally to the
signals, and does not require any AFFC. The codes can be easily
changes to the flight crew interface read from the AFFC and cross-
for its operation. When crew select checked with troubleshooting doc-
auto-mode on the overhead fuel umentation to identify which com-
panel, the AFFC will operate to ponents should be targeted by
automatically control the fuel feed. maintenance crews. This allows for
On Airbus A310 and A300-600 aircraft types, sup- Recognising these factors, Airbus and Goodrich rapid troubleshooting and helps
ply of fuel to the engines is maintained by an auto- Fuel and Utility Systems joined forces to review Improved system dispatch of the aircraft. At the base
matic system, which controls the center and inner the system and recently introduced an updated maintenance level, an ARINC429
maintainability
tank fuel pumps and the water scavenge pumps. auto-feed system, which takes advantage of devel- transmitter can be interrogated in
The current system was conceived before wide- opments in digital computer technology. through added order to provide system data for the
spread introduction of digital technology and con- past 20 flights. This transmitter can
functionality
sists of up to 30 fault and control relays, which are The new Auto Fuel Feed Controller (AFFC) has also be interrogated to obtain the
located in different avionics panels. The system been designed to dramatically improve maintain- current status of all discrete AFFC
architecture and implementation necessitates a ability and to augment the already high system The AFFC brings added function- inputs and outputs.
good level of system knowledge to troubleshoot. reliability. In addition, the opportunity has been ality to the fuel feed system in
Also, as the relays age with the aircraft, their reli- taken to introduce system operation improve- order to greatly reduce trou- Both the BITE and the ARINC429
ability can decrease. These factors can increase ments through the software control logic. bleshooting workload. It achieves transmitter are autofeed system
the need and the time required for troubleshooting this by both reducing the number improvements, enabling trouble
the system. of autofeed faults seen on the air- shooting that is not feasible with
craft and by providing efficient the current system.
troubleshooting tools.
AFFC installation
The amount of logic the current
autofeed system can apply to the
monitored system inputs is limited It is possible to install the AFFC on
by the number of relays. all A300-600 and A310 aircraft
Daniel Percy
Airbus Customer Services Experience with the current system types, which do not already have it
Fuel Systems Engineer has shown that a number of indi- selected as an option. The installa-
Customer Services Engineering cated autofeed faults could be pre- tion is completed in two stages:
vented by having additional logic Provisioning and installation. Both
within the system to take account of these stages are covered
2
63
TSAF
AFFC - UPGRADING YOUR AIRBUS FLEET FOR ADDITIONAL MAINTAINABILITY
Auto Fuel Feed Controller inputs and outputs
28V DC aircraft power
Push button switches
Pumps control
Tank level sensors
Cockpit lamps & ECAM
Fuel quantity computer
Water scavenge control
Refuel panel
Maintenance transmitter
Pump feedback signals
Pin programming
by Service Bulletins (SBs), which The installation stage reconfigures
are already available from Airbus. the aircraft wiring to connect the
provisioned harness to the fuel sys-
During the provisioning a new tem electronics and then remove
wiring harness is installed in the the current relays. Once this is
forward avionics bay between the completed, the AFFC is installed in
AFFC and the relays, which are to the mounting cage, and the harness
be replaced. A mounting cage is plugged in to the AFFCs connec-
also installed in the avionics bay tors to complete the new system.
between frames 12 and 12A. These Finally, some cleanup work is com-
modifications have already been pleted in order to remove cables
completed prior to delivery on air- made redundant by installation of
craft from MSN 859 onwards. the AFFC.
CONTACT DETAILS
Daniel Percy
Airbus Customer Services
Fuel Systems Engineer
Customer Services Engineering
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 76 33
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 32 73
daniel.percy@airbus.com
Conclusion
Troubleshooting of faults on relay The AFFC has been in operation with
based automated aircraft systems requires two operators since early 2005 and has
a good level of system knowledge and accumulated over 3200 flight hours so far
generally needs longer time periods without any faults reported on the
when compared to the functionality autofeed system. The system is available
provided by the BITE of digital systems. and the standard SBs can be ordered by
For A300-600 and A310 aircraft autofeed any operator wishing to embody the
system relays that are ageing and may be modification.
experiencing an increase in unscheduled
maintenance, the AFFC offers the
opportunity to enhance fleet reliability and
limit the risk of dispatch delays.
5
63
TSAF
LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS
LLooww ffuueell
tteemmppeerraattuurreess
BBaassiiccss,, pprriinncciipplleess ooff ooppeerraattiioonnss
aanndd aa nneeww ssooffttwwaarree ttooooll
ffoorr ooppeerraattiioonnaall pprreeddiiccttiioonnss
With the operation of the very long range on the Electronic Centralized Aircraft Monitor
A340-500 and -600 on polar routings, the (ECAM) and in Flight Crew Operating
exposure of Airbus aircraft to low fuel temper- Manual (FCOM) 3.02.28 and describes new
ature issues has increased. This article summa- software now available to operators to predict
rizes some basics regarding the minimum fuel fuel temperatures for a given flight at the time
temperature that can be tolerated, reviews the of dispatch.
principles of the FUEL LO TEMP procedures
Lars Kornstaedt
Airbus Customer Services
Group Manager A380 Performance
Flight Operations Support and Services
5
7
63
TSAF
7
63
TSAF
LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS
Minimum The fuel freezing point is common- tanks. JetA1 can be considered as engine inlet temperature is the actu-
ly measured with the ASTM auto- having unaltered freezing character- al fuel freezing point with the man-
allowed fuel
mated optical test method D5901- istics up to a content of 10% of ufacturers margin added to it (see
03. ASTM International is an orga- JetA, above that fraction results right-hand table).
temperature
nization which develops standards, become unpredictable and the fuel
amongst which are the fuel freez- freezing point should be considered FUEL HEAT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
Operating the aircraft within the ing point tests. This test method is to be that of JetA fuel. LIMITATION
certified environmental envelope is based on the observation of wax
not sufficient to prevent issues crystals completely disappearing ACTUAL FUEL FREEZING POINT During flight, the fuel temperature
with cold fuel. Indeed, safe engine from a warmed fuel sample that quickly drops below the freezing
operation leads to two engine-spe- was previously frozen. The method When known, the actual fuel freez- point of water, of which a certain
cific limitations: the minimum is used widely except for Russian ing point of the fuel carried proportion is always contained in
inlet temperature and the fuel heat and other Eastern-European fuels, onboard the aircraft may be aviation fuels. This water can then
management system limitation. for which the GOST (Russian state retained as a criterion for cold fuel form ice crystals, which could trav-
More information on fuel charac- standard) method gives the temper- management in flight, if a monitor- el to the engine inlet filters and
teristics is given in the ‘Getting ature at which solid particles first ing process, including mainte- clog them. To avoid this, the fuel is
to Grips with Cold Weather appear during the cooling process. nance, dispatch, and crew proce- warmed in the oil cooling system.
Operations’ brochure available The ASTM method therefore dures, has been set up in a way that For some engine types, a minimum
from Airbus. affords higher margins. is acceptable to local authorities. fuel temperature below which take-
The process involves the retrieval off and/or flight is not permitted
FUEL FREEZING POINT The specification fuel freezing of samples from the tanks through therefore results from the engine
point depends directly on the level the drain holes after the refueling is capability to warm up a water-satu-
The fuel characteristic that best of distillation aimed for in its pro- completed. These are then put rated fuel flow, unless an anti-ice
describes the lower limit in tem- duction. The higher the distillation through jet fuel quality analysers, additive is used. Minimum inlet temperature
perature for use in aircraft opera- grade, the lower the yield of fuel results can be radioed to the crew if
Operational
tions is not actually the fuel freez- from the crude oil. Fuel of different not available before takeoff. Based
ing point, but the pumpability specifications is found in different on a fuel freezing point measure- procedures
limit. This limit is very close to the parts of the world, each with a dif- ment survey conducted by a com-
pour point, a temperature at which ferent specification fuel freezing pany involved in research in cold
GROUND PROCEDURES
0°C
the fuel, cooled without stirring, point. The main focus is on JetA1, temperature behaviour of petrole-
will only just still pour from a primarily available everywhere um products at major US airports, a Special attention should be paid to
0°C
standard glass cylinder. However, except the United States of typical benefit of at least 3°C and the fuel contained in the outer tanks
since the pour point is difficult to America, and on JetA, which is up to 18°C can be expected from before a flight through forecast cold 3°C
determine accurately, the fuel used there (see left-hand table). the implementation of such a mon- atmosphere is commenced. These
4°C
freezing point continues to be used itoring process. tanks may remain completely or
as a reference for low-temperature FUEL MIXTURES partially filled with the cold reserve
A320F 4°C
characteristics. MINIMUM INLET TEMPERATURE fuel from the previous flight.
When flying between areas where This may have an unrelated, but A340 5°C
Fuel is a mixture of different hydro- different fuel types are available, Engines have an oil cooling system undesirable, effect of leading to
carbons that do not all solidify at the mixtures of fuel with different spec- at their inlet, which uses the arriving wing surface icing after landing in a
same temperature. When fuel is ification fuel freezing points will fuel as a heat sink, thus warming it. humid environment. More impor-
Fuel freezing point cooled, an increasing proportion of occur in the tanks. Experimental Various system architectures and tantly, if partially filled, it may lead
wax crystals form in the fuel. The evidence has shown that fuel mix- hardware leads to a varying specifi- to high-proportion mixtures of dif-
wax crystals can block fuel lines tures do not behave as ideal fluids cation of the minimum temperature ferent fuel types. Both can be avoid-
and filters, thus causing engine and that the resulting fuel freezing that a given engine type can cope ed by performing a manual transfer
instability, power loss and eventual- point is commonly adversely affect- with. The minimum temperature of the outer tank fuel inboard dur-
ly flameout, and their formation ed. Airbus recommends avoiding is expressed as a margin versus ing the taxi-in. If the outer tanks
JetA -40°C should therefore be avoided. mixtures in the outer, most exposed fuel freezing point - the minimum remain full with fuel of a lower
JP5 -46°C
JetA1/JP8 -47°C
RT/TS-1 -50°C
JetB -50°C
TH -53°C
JP4 -58°C
6
9
63
TSAF
9
63
TSAF
LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS
freezing temperature than fuel local- The figure ‘tank transfer schemat-
TAT increase - ‘fly faster’
ly available, it may be advantageous ic’ shows an example for the
to keep that fuel there, since experi- A340-500 and -600, the FCOM
ence shows that a higher initial fuel 3.02.28 FUEL LO TEMP proce-
temperature only has a delaying dures request manual transfers:
effect on the cooling process, but • From outers to inners, when
usually does not affect the minimum the fuel freezing point is
temperature observed in-flight. The reached in the outers
benefit of the lower freezing point • Forward from the trim tank,
prevails in such a case. when the fuel freezing point
is reached in the trim tank
IN-FLIGHT PROCEDURES • From center to inner, when
the minimum acceptable
On aircraft equipped with a fuel temperature is reached in
temperature measurement system, the inners
an ECAM warning is triggered
when the fuel temperature drops TAT INCREASE
below the minimum acceptable tem-
perature in that tank. The minimum In addition to manual transfers, the
acceptable temperature is not the procedure also recommends to
same for all tanks. The temperature increase the TAT (Total Air
in the feed tanks (typically, but not Temperature), which is the temper-
exclusively, the inner tanks) may not ature measured on the structure of
drop below the minimum acceptable the aircraft. The TAT is derived
temperature limited by the engine from the outside or Static Air
inlet and the heat management sys- Temperature (SAT) and depends on
tem limitation, while the fuel in the the Mach (Ma) number:
remaining tanks may be allowed to
reach the freezing point. The ECAM TAT = SAT x (1 + 0.2 x Ma2)
warnings are calibrated to the spe-
cification values of JetA and There are two means of increasing
JetA1 fuel and request manual fuel the TAT: increasing speed to
transfers. The crew may delay the increase aerodynamic warming,
application of the procedures appro- and reducing altitude to fly in
priately, if the actual fuel freezing warmer air. The TAT formula high-
point of the fuel carried is known. lights that speed increase only has a
marginal effect, while the exchange
rate SAT to TAT is one to one.
To give an impression of the effect
in time, both means are shown in
separate variations from a basic
scenario, which considers an
A340-600 taking off at Maximum
Take Off Weight (MTOW) flying
from the US East Coast to East
Asia on a great circle routing at
Long Range Cruise (LRC) speed
and on an optimum altitude pro-
file. The aircraft is using JetA fuel
with a specification fuel freezing
point of -40°C. A statistical outside
temperature profile is considered
for this example, based on a 95%
reliability for January, meaning
that at any point during an actual
flight in that month, there is only a
5% chance of encountering lower
temperatures.
8
)tf
0001(
edutitla
/
)C°(
erutarepmeT
)tf
0001(
edutitla
/
)C°(
erutarepmeT
The first variationconsists in fly-
ing at maximum managed speed
(Ma 0.845 for this type) on a fuel-
Comparison of fuel temperatures in outer
optimized profile. The figure “fly
and inner 1/4 tanks for two speeds
faster” shows the relevant parame-
ters plotted against the ground dis-
tance, the basic scenario always
shown in shades of blue and the
variation case in shades of
red/orange. The speed increase
leads to a shift in the optimum pro-
file, which is mirrored by the SAT
profile, but even where the aircraft
flies at the same altitude, a small
increase in TAT can be observed.
This increase delays the moment
when the temperature drops below
freezing point in the outer tanks by
some 300 nautical miles (nm), but
does not avoid the need for the
manual transfer procedure from Distance (nm)
the outers to the inners. It does,
however, succeed in maintaining
the inner tanks temperature above TAT increase - ‘fly lower’
or at the freezing temperature,
which is sufficient for the Rolls Comparison of fuel temperatures in outer
Royce Trent 500 engines that and inner 1/4 tanks for two altitude profiles
equip this aircraft type. This
comes at a cost: fuel burn at iden-
tical takeoff weight is increased by
7.9 tonne (t).
The second variation considers
flying the whole distance at Flight
Tank transfer schematic Level (FL) 290. The figure ‘fly
lower’shows the large increase in
SAT, which is mirrored by the TAT.
The lower flight level succeeds in
delaying the manual transfer by
800 nm and subsequently main-
taining a comfortable margin of the
fuel freezing point in the inner
tanks. The cost of this variation is a
fuel burn increase by 5.5t. Distance (nm)
11
63
TSAF
11
63
TSAF
LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS LOW FUEL TEMPERATURES - BASICS,PRINCIPLES OF OPERATIONS AND A NEW SOFTWARE TOOL FOR OPERATIONAL PREDICTIONS
Fuel temperature From this data, it determines the operability on a variety of plat- the route is established with the
nominal fuel distribution and forms. At this time, stand-alone Airbus Flight Planning (FLIP)
prediction software
movement during the flight and solutions are being developed for software, which is also part of the
simulates the effect of the various PC and UNIX under RS6000, in PEP.
As described in the previous sec- heat exchange processes, like con- addition to the basic implementa-
tion, while it is possible to manage vection, radiation, external heat tion, which is a complete solution For the statistical weather data, a
cold fuel issues once in flight, an sources and mass transfer. The included in the Performance connection has been built to the
un-forecasted occurrence can lead result is a detailed output of the Engineer’s Programs (PEP) soft- NOAA GUACA (National Oceanic
to over-consumption and even fuel temperatures in each tank at ware suite. and Atmospheric Administration
diversion. In order to give airlines each waypoint, a summary that - Global Upper Air Climatic Atlas),
the ability to analyse a flight for its indicates whether the flight can be An important aspect lies in the which was compiled from data
exposure to fuel freezing before it dispatched under the given condi- large variety of flight plans to be obtained in the 80’s and 90’s from
is flown, Airbus has designed the tions, whether any manual trans- imported. This has been tackled in the ECMRWF (European Centre
Fuel Temperature Prediction (FTP) fers were triggered during the sim- the PEP environment through the for Medium Range Weather
software. ulation, and what the lowest tem- definition of a standard format, Forecasts). This database needs to
perature forecast in each tank is. which uses XML (eXtensible be installed specifically to allow
PRINCIPLES This information allows the dis- Markup Language) and is a subset extraction of statistical data for
patcher to decide in an informed of the standard defined for the monthly or seasonal exposure
The FTP software relies on exter- manner, which areas may have to A380 Onboard Information analysis.
nal data sources to obtain: be avoided on a critical flight. System (OIS). The translation of
• Navigation data (waypoints, the airline pilot log to XML Information and the database are
distance, time) OPERATING MODES requires the development of a cus- available from the NOAA website:
Schematic of heat
• Weather data (temperatures) tomized tool. All the relevant infor- http://navy.ncdc.noaa.gov/prod-
exchange mechanisms
• Performance data (altitude, The FTP can be used in two ways mation for this task is provided in ucts/compactdisk/guaca.html.
speed, fuel on board) depending on the original source the Performance Programs Manual
of the navigation, weather and per- (PPM), but assistance and even the The FLIP computation results in a
formance data: the Flight Plan development of such a tool is avail- specific output, which can be direct-
Analysis and the Sector Analysis. able as an Airbus service. ly imported into the FTP PEP user
interface, through which the same
FLIGHT PLAN ANALYSIS SECTOR ANALYSIS type of analysis can be obtained as
for a Flight Plan Analysis.
The Flight Plan Analysis uses an The Sector Analysis is designed to
airline operational flight plan (or help assess the exposure of a city- APPLICABILITY CONTACT DETAILS
pilot log) as a basis for the compu- pair to cold fuel issues on a statis-
Lars Kornstaedt
tation. Operational flight plans are tical basis. For this task, some The FTP software is available for
Airbus Customer Services
Fuel level tank generated with Computerized simplifications are made. The all A330/A340 Family aircraft and Group Manager
Flight Planning (CFP) systems routing is assumed to be a Great will be released for entry into ser- A380 Performance
available from a number of Circle one; the performance on vice of the A380 and the A350. Flight Operations Support
and Services
providers. They run on different
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 36 75
hardware, like PCs, UNIX or main-
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 29 68
frame computers, or even remotely Conclusion fltops.perfo@airbus.com
over Internet or similar connections, lars.kornstaedt@airbus.com
and they produce a document,
which is highly customized by the
operators to their specific needs. For some years monitoring of fuel This led to a review and from this
temperatures for flights in cold came Airbus’ recommendation that
One of the design constraints for atmospheres, such as trans-polar flights, operators implement a fuel quality
the FTP software was therefore its has been normal and operational monitoring programme for exposed flights
procedures to deal with this have been from airports where only high freezing
put in place. With the very long range temperature fuel is available and the
A340-500 and A340-600, Airbus creation of the Fuel Temperature
considered the increased exposure of Prediction (FTP) programme. The FTP
these aircraft to low temperatures should enables the prediction and avoidance of
be addressed at an earlier stage in the cold fuel issues at the time of aircraft
process than through the existing in-flight dispatch and is recommended for
management procedures detailed in the operators to support their operations on
FCOM and triggered by ECAM warnings. routes where such issues can arise.
10
AACT - A NEW APPROACH TO MAINTENANCE TRAINING
13
63
TSAF
AACT - A NEW APPROACH TO MAINTENANCE TRAINING
AACT
Airbus Active learning and
Competence focused Training
A new approach to maintenance training
In the past, maintenance training mainly focused A further step in this process sees the AACT
on theoretical knowledge acquisition. As part of (Airbus Active learning and Competence focused
Airbus policy of continually improving training Training) course being introduced. The AACT
courses, the maintenance training courses began course is a new approach developed by Airbus for
to evolve, starting with the implementation of the training maintenance technicians.
MTD (Maintenance Training Device) in the
course flow a few years ago. The MTD allowed The main innovation in this new approach is the
trainees to gain practical skills before having real intensive use of new Airbus simulation tools, like
practice on an aircraft. the M/FTD (Maintenance/Flight Training Device)
and the virtual aircraft, which enable maintenance
tasks to be performed throughout all their steps.
13
63
TSAF
AACT New simulation
objectives tools
The AACT innovations focus on The key elements of AACT cours-
two central aspects: es are two new training tools: the
M/FTD and the virtual aircraft.
ACTIVE LEARNING
The M/FTD is a training tool that
Training experts generally agree is common to flight and mainte-
that, whatever the subject is, most nance training. It replicates the real
people learn better when they are aircraft cockpit with PC (Personal
actively involved during training. Computer) screens and simulates
With AACT, aircraft maintenance the aircraft systems and mainte-
technician trainees will participate nance BITE (Built In Test
more actively in the course, and will Equipment).
not be passive recipients of theoret-
ical knowledge only. This active Two versions of the M/FTD are
participation in the classroom is available:
especially important for technicians • The 3D M/FTD, which is built
accustomed to involvement in the with touch-screens displayed as
actual operation of aircraft. in a real cockpit, plus some
essential aircraft hardware
OPERATIONALLY ORIENTED TRAINING equipment (like Flight Control
Unit and Multipurpose Control
The obvious objective of any main- & Display Unit)
tenance training course is to train • The 2D M/FTD, which is a
people to be competent in their job, lighter version of the M/FTD
that is: maintaining and operating and consists of only two
aircraft safely and efficiently. screens, without the aircraft
hardware equipment
Adaptation and evolution of such
training is always necessary to The virtual aircraft tool is a new
handle the latest aircraft technolo- Airbus application, based on virtu-
gies and maintenance practices. In al reality and running on a normal
the newest Airbus aircraft, espe- PC. It simulates the whole aircraft
cially the A380, the aircraft sys- and enables trainees, in a three-
tems are more integrated and dimensional on-screen environ-
sophisticated maintenance tools ment, to walk around the aircraft
are provided for maintenance tech- and locate aircraft components or
nicians. To follow these aircraft visit aircraft areas, such as the Both of these tools
evolutions, AACT training will be avionics bay or main landing gear will be intensively used
more operationally oriented than bay. When linked with the M/FTD, in the AACT programme
before and not only focused on air- maintenance actions can also be to perform the practical
craft system knowledge. simulated in the virtual aircraft. sessions,as well as
to support the
theoretical part.
Virtual aircraft M/FTD
Christèle Bertrand
Airbus Customer Services
Training Project Leader
Training & Flight Operations Support and Services
12
AACT - A NEW APPROACH TO MAINTENANCE TRAINING
15
63
TSAF
AACT - A NEW APPROACH TO MAINTENANCE TRAINING
AACT training a task in a more realistic way and
as a whole, from cockpit actions
programme
such as post-flight report consul-
tation and fault isolation through
For theoretical sessions, the air- the Multifunction Control and
craft systems will still be described Display Unit, to action on an air-
using classical Computer Assisted craft component, like removal and
Training (CAT) lessons, whereas installation of a suspect unit, then
the system operation, control & back to the cockpit to perform
indications will be demonstrated BITE tests of the installed unit.
with the 2D M/FTD. This use of
the M/FTD in the classroom will This complete simulation environ-
allow the instructor to use the ment brought by the M/FTD and
M/FTD simulation to demonstrate virtual aircraft, coupled with the
systems with more flexibility and aircraft documentation access, pro-
realism for the benefit of trainees. vides an efficient and secure way
to conduct major practical exercis-
During training the main aircraft es when compared to a real aircraft
components will be located and where all tasks cannot be actually
described in the virtual aircraft, and completely performed by all
avoiding unnecessary immobiliza- trainees. The virtual aircraft
tion of an actual aircraft, which can answers the main issues encoun-
be difficult and costly. Each trainee tered on real aircraft, such as diffi-
will also be able to use the virtual culty to simulate faults, remove
aircraft freely at any time in the and replace components, the safety
training to review components and risk for trainees, time necessary to
locations. allow each trainee to perform tasks
and so on.
Practical sessions of servicing
and troubleshooting maintenance New learning
tasks (Aircraft Maintenance
environment
Manual and Trouble Shooting
Manual tasks) will be performed
by trainees on the M/FTD cou- The 2D M/FTD and the virtual air-
pled with the virtual aircraft and craft will be installed in the class-
using the electronic aircraft docu- room, directly on the trainees' desk,
mentation. This link between both to maximize training benefits from
tools allows simulation of the the tools. This easy access to the
whole aircraft (inside and out- tools will allow a greater mix of
side), and not only the cockpit as theory and practice than was previ-
was the case in previous genera- ously possible and will enable
tion training devices. With these explanation of systems theory step
tools, trainees are able to perform by step, prior to practical applica-
15
63
TSAF
tion. Trainees will therefore Course
become more and more active in
deployment
the learning process, at every stage
of the training. Furthermore, they
will no longer need to wait to the The AACT approach will be pro-
end of the theoretical part to inter- gressively applied to all Airbus
act in the course and perform the maintenance courses. The first
tasks by themselves. course using the AACT philosophy
is the A320 Family maintenance
In the AACT course, human fac- course and will be run in autumn
tors training will be integrated and 2005 in the Hamburg training cen-
will no longer be considered as tre. After this, AACT courses will
separate training. Human factor be implemented in 2006 for the
issues will be integrated with tech- first A380 maintenance course,
nical and operational training and and then on A330 and A340 Family
spread in the different types of ses- courses.
sions: theoretical lessons and oper-
ational scenarios.
CONTACT DETAILS
Christèle Bertrand
Airbus Customer Services
Training Project Leader
Training & Flight Operations
Support and Services
Conclusion
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 25 07
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 20 73
christele.bertrand@airbus.com
Using the latest simulation tools like
M/FTD and virtual aircraft and
providing an easy and intense access
to them for trainees, allows in a sense
to bring the aircraft into the
classroom. The AACT course,
combining the efficiency of such tools
and a more active learning
environment will significantly enhance
the quality and efficiency of
maintenance training, and as a
consequence the safety and efficiency
of maintenance operation on aircraft.
14
T2CAS - UPGRADING YOUR AIRCRAFT BY COMBINING TCAS AND TAWS IN ONE UNIT
17
63
TSAF
T2CAS - UPGRADING YOUR AIRCRAFT BY COMBINING TCAS AND TAWS IN ONE UNIT
Airbus aircraft have been equipped with the and Traffic Collision Avoidance System) which
GPWS (Ground Proximity Warning System), combines the Terrain Awareness Warning System
which was followed by the Enhanced Ground (TAWS) currently named EGPWS, and the TCAS
Proximity Warning System (EGPWS) certified in in one unit.
1997 to warn of terrain collision hazards. In addi-
tion, Traffic alert and Collision Avoidance System As an alternative to the currently certified TAWS
(TCAS) has been installed to warn of aircraft and the TCAS, the T2CAS allows maintenance
mid-air collision hazards. cost reductions as well as a global weight
decrease.
Since February 2005, Airbus is offering a solution
integrating both functions: the T2CAS (Terrain
17
63
TSAF
TAWS TCAS
The TAWS generates alerts to inform the flight crew The TCAS function is an independent,onboard
that the terrain ahead of the aircraft on its intended collision avoidance system designed to assist flight
flight path poses a hazard to safe flight. crews in avoiding midair collisions.
TAWS is intended to warn the flight crew of hazards When activated,TCAS acts as a backup means of
that could result in controlled flight into terrain with collision protection from other aircraft that have an
sufficient time for them to assess the situation and Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon System (ATCRBS) or
determine the best remedial action. Mode-S Transponder.
TAWS is mandated by the European Aviation Safety
Agency for all types of aircraft from the first of
January 2005 (end of March 2005 for the Federal
Aviation Administration).
T2CAS
Ground Terrain and traffic avoidance combined Traffic
collision collision
avoidance avoidance
system TAWS + TCAS system
T2CAS
• Predictive • TCAS 2000
Terrain and Traffic Collision alerting platform
• Situation display • Situation display
• GPWS modes
Avoidance System
Upgrading your aircraft by combining
TAWS functions
TCAS and TAWS in one unit
The T2CAS-TAWS part specifica-
tion is a class A TAWS per TSO
C151b standard. It therefore pro-
vides suitable aural and visual
warnings to alert the crew of any
hazardous situation with respect to
the terrain ensuring the following
functions:
Mode 1 A Forward Looking Terrain Avoidance (FLTA) function
Excessive rates of descent The FLTA function looks ahead of the aircraft along and below
the aircraft lateral and vertical flight path and provides suitable
Mode 2 alerts if a potential terrain threat exists.The FLTA function on
Excessive closure rate to terrain the T2CAS is based on a worldwide terrain database.
Mode 3 A Premature Descent Alert (PDA) function
Negative climb rate or altitude loss after take off The PDA function of the TAWS uses the aircraft’s current
position and flight path information,determined from a suitable
Mode 4 navigation source and airport database,to determine if the
Flight into terrain when not in landing configuration aircraft is hazardously below the normal approach path for the
Christine Vigier nearest runway as defined by the alerting algorithm,visual and
Airbus Customer Services Mode 5 aural discretes signal for both caution and warning alerts,(a
Senior Design Manager Excessive downward deviation from an ILS (Instrument specific visual and aural discrete signal is sent to the flight
Airbus Upgrade Services Landing System) glideslope crew for each type of alert,either caution or warning).
16
T2CAS - UPGRADING YOUR AIRCRAFT BY COMBINING TCAS AND TAWS IN ONE UNIT
19
63
TSAF
19
63
TSAF
T2CAS - UPGRADING YOUR AIRCRAFT BY COMBINING TCAS AND TAWS IN ONE UNIT
TAWS functions
Mode 2 nuisance alert!
CCPPAA ddeetteeccttss nnoo tthhrreeaatt
TCAS functions
TCAS functions
The T2CAS-TCAS part corre-
sponds to a TCAS II change 7.0 in
compliance with existing regula-
tions. It is functionally, as well as
operationally, equivalent to any
TCAS II change 7.0 installed in TCAS separation areas
aircraft in–service.
The TAWS part of the T2CAS - A new aural warning ‘Avoid The system has 3 main functions:
uses the same cockpit interface as Terrain’alerts the flight crew • Detects close aircraft (equipped
for EGPWS. In comparison to that the climb capability of the with Air Traffic Control (ATC)
EGPWS the T2CAS-TAWS offers aircraft may not be sufficient to transponders),
some significant enhancements: clear the terrain. • Displays possible collision
• Certified FLTA (Forward - A corresponding red and black aircraft,
Looking Terrain Avoidance) crosshatched area on ND depicts • Activates vertical orders in
and PDA functions are the terrain concerned. order to avoid collision.
ensured by the CPA (Collision • The nuisance prone mode 2
Prediction and Avoidance) (solely based on measured radio The system is designed to generate
function in T2CAS. Based on altitude) is inhibited while safe separation between aircraft
actual aircraft climb FLTA function (the CPA predicted to be on collision trajec-
capability, the CPA offers the function previously described) tories, while minimizing ATC
following enhancements: is operative. clearance deviations or excursions.
TCAS continually surveys the air- TA: Traffic Advisory
space around the host aircraft by
Avoid terrain alert TAWS display
actively interrogating and seeking RA: Resolution Advisory
replies from the transponders of
other aircraft in the vicinity. It rec-
ognizes replies from aircraft
equipped with ICAO Mode-A,
Mode-C, or Mode-S transponders
and determines the range, relative
bearing, and the relative altitude of
the other aircraft. Using this infor-
mation, TCAS predicts flight
paths, estimates the separation at
the closest point of approach
“Avoid terrain” (CPA), and determines if a poten-
tial conflict exists. If a conflict is
detected, the system gives guid-
ance for the optimum vertical
avoidance manoeuvre.
18
21
63
TSAF
T2CAS - UPGRADING YOUR AIRCRAFT BY COMBINING TCAS AND TAWS IN ONE UNIT A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS
Wiring provisions and installation
T2CAS
Ground Terrain and traffic avoidance combined Traffic
collision collision
avoidance avoidance
system TAWS + TCAS system
• Predictive • TCAS 2000
alerting platform
• Situation display • Situation display
• GPWS modes
Wiring provisions the production line for all pro-
grammes.
and installation
To retrofit the aircraft with a
Installed at the same rack as the T2CAS, the following prerequi-
TCAS computer, this upgrade sites have to be installed if not A new concept
solution is easy to integrate in the available on the aircraft:
avionics compartment as it uses the • EGPWS provisions
same peripheral computers as the and the related peripheral
EGPWS. computers,
• TCAS Change 7.0, for Service Bulletins
Airbus delivers 2 Service Bulletins • Compatible mode S ATC
and the related kits: The first is for transponder,
wiring provisions and the second for • Pin programming according to
T2CAS installation. As an option, the aircraft configuration,
the aircraft wiring provisions for • T2CAS computer and
addressing airline expectations
T2CAS can be directly installed on associated antennas.
for Service Bulletins
Conclusion
Airbus has launched a 'Service Bulletin New The project arose from one core idea that led
Concept' (SB New Concept) project, which Airbus to a new approach to SBs: there is a
has the objectives to: real need to reduce airlines engineering work-
The combination of the TCAS and types of Airbus aircraft (except
• Improve SB communication load generated by SBs.
TAWS into one Line Replaceable A300 B2/B4) since the first
Unit (LRU) provides an innovative embodiment for each programme • Ease SB understanding
CONTACT DETAILS and flexible alternative to the two has been realized between • Reduce airline engineering SB workload
separate LRUs of the existing February and April 2005: An A320 • Match SBs with airline practices
Christine VIGIER
systems. Combining them into was retrofitted at the end of • Minimize aircraft ground-time
Airbus Customer Services
T2CAS gives significant February, an A340 at the beginning • Contribute to improving vendor
Senior Design Manager
enhancements over some of the of March and an A300-600 at the performance
Airbus Upgrade Services
functions of the existing systems, end of April.
Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 02 17
provides a weight decrease and
Fax: +33 (0)5 62 11 08 47
christine.vigier@airbus.com furthermore reduces maintenance The system item is scheduled to Annick Pedron
costs for operators. be available via the Upgrade Customer Services
Since February 2005, Airbus can Services E-catalogue at the Manager Process,Method & VSB Monitoring
provide a certified solution for all beginning of 2006. Service Bulletin Department
21
63
TSAF
20
23
63
TSAF
23
63
TSAF
A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS
How to access event notification services
A new approach A tremendous number of ideas
were generated by the analysis
to SBs
and services were identified that
could help in several areas of the
The project is a completely new airline process, not only in the
approach to SBs and was initiated ‘engineering preparation’area.
by key messages from the airline
community, which led Airbus to The future services defined will
analyse what could be improved cover the different steps of the SB
and identify a new concept for integration process, from receipt to
SBs. The decision to launch the embodiment and cover mainly
project was taken with some air- Airbus SBs, but will also cover
lines and workshops were orga- vendor SBs to some extent and
nized in 2004 to ensure the SB embrace the project objectives.
New Concept will really match air-
lines expectations. Improve SB
communication
Working together with these air-
lines, Airbus identified enhance-
ments to apply to SBs to achieve Airlines would like improved com-
the project objectives and defined munications with Airbus and are
future services to be offered. This also interested in sharing experi-
was done by a collaborative ence with the general airline com-
approach with the involved munity. This will be achieved with
airlines, which allowed Airbus a service called ‘General on-line
to understand and analyse the services’, which started with the
SB integration process on the air- ‘Event Notification’service avail-
line’s side (Refer to figure ‘A able on Airbus On-Line Services
generic view of SB processing at since September 2004. Airlines
airlines’). registering to the ‘notification sub-
scription’ are then notified by
This joint analysis of airline e-mail whenever SBs are made
activities resulting from the available on Airbus On-Line
receipt of SBs allowed Airbus to Services (Refer to figure ‘How to
understand any difficulties the access event notification services’
airlines could face with handling on the following page) .
SBs and determine what should
be changed, what improvements The next step, by the beginning of
should be required and what new 2006, will be an SB on-line report-
on-line SB services could be ing service to make the SB accom-
offered to reduce airline SB activ- plishment reporting activity easier
ities and make them easier. for airlines.
Select the
After this, an SB FAQ (Frequently
A generic view of SB frequency,
processing at airlines Asked Questions) and forum will the type of
be introduced. This will be done as documents
a second step of the Airbus FAIR and enter
related
(Forum for Airline Issues
e-mail
Resolution) project in the third
addresses.
quarter of 2006. This service will
offer a forum for discussion, so
that airlines can share experience
with other airlines on SB embodi-
ment. It will also provide an area
where Airbus will inform airlines
of queries received and their asso-
ciated answers, to proactively
anticipate similar queries from
other airlines.
22
25
63
TSAF
25
63
TSAF
A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS
Ease SB tion of photos into SBs to comple- engineers may spend a significant way of working and will be
ment the current illustrations. The amount of time identifying what addressed by Airbus in three ways:
understanding
advantage of photo integration is to impacts a specific aircraft and • Configuration management
better show the area concerned by reworking an SB into smaller tasks • Detailed task breakdown
SB implementation can be some- a modification or inspection. for engineering orders to enable • Introduction of hyperlinks
times time consuming and airlines accomplishment on that aircraft.
would like Airbus to make SBs The possibility of using a digital Man-hours can be saved by provid- CONFIGURATION MANAGEMENT
easier to understand to reduce this. mock-up to build movies showing ing airlines with a document in line
part of the modification for com- with their working practices in the This will ease access to SB data by
For some complex SBs an addi- plex SBs is also under study. This shape of a ‘fully engineered SB’– introducing management by con-
tional document called an ‘SB is feasible because Airbus designs meaning an SB ready for an airline figuration, which will harmonize
booklet’ has been already intro- new aircraft models using 3D com- to use and designed in accordance SB contents and allow data filter-
duced. This booklet describes a puter aided design, so the 3D views with engineering orders. ing. Using it, airlines can easily
complete modification in photos could be used to implement a select, consult, extract and down-
taken during an SB validation on library of movies. This will be The ‘fully engineered SB’ objec- load data concerning their own
in-service aircraft (Refer to figure applicable only for new aircraft tive is to adapt SBs to the airlines fleet or individual aircraft.
‘Extracts from SB booklets avail- programmes. How to access SB booklets
able on Airbus On-Line Services’). on Airbus On-Line Services
Reduce airline
These are available now on Airbus
engineering SB
On-line Services and are accessible
from the ‘Service Bulletin workload
Information’ area of the ‘General
Information’ service (Refer to This area is the major one of inter-
figure ‘How to access SB booklets est for airlines and will be covered
on Airbus On-Line Services’on the by an enhancement known as ‘fully
following page). engineered SB’. SBs are some-
times quite complex and can also
This approach will be further cover several different aircraft con-
enhanced in 2006 with the integra- figurations. As a result, airline
Extracts from SB booklets available
on Airbus On-Line Services
24
27
63
TSAF
How to access VSB on
Airbus On-Line Services
Other enhancements, related to
Airbus internal processes, are also
planned with a VSB on-line scrutiny
to improve VSB timeliness and accu-
racy. Airbus is also working with CONTACT DETAILS
suppliers to make available by the
Annick Pedron
end of 2007 all VSBs on Airbus On- Airbus Customer Services
Line Services and not only those cov- Manager Process,Method &
ered by an Airbus SB. VSB Monitoring
Service Bulletin Department
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 28 59
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 42 51
annick.pedron@airbus.com
Conclusion
Continuous improvement is one of The concept is already providing some
the key objectives of Airbus Customer benefits in SB activities and, as future
Services and the SB New Concept is a waves of enhancements are implemented,
concrete example of this. The concept numerous additional benefits will become
has been defined and implemented in available to airlines to enhance the
partnership with airlines to ensure SB and efficiency and reduce the costs of their
associated services enhancements fully SB activities.
match airline expectations.
27
63
TSAF
A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS A NEW CONCEPT FOR SERVICE BULLETINS ADRESSING AIRLINE EXPECTATIONS FOR SERVICE BULLETINS
DETAILED TASK BREAKDOWN hours to enable planning of work to
fit into shift patterns. This break-
Segmenting accomplishment inst- down approach is now being
ructions into smaller tasks will applied for any new Airbus SB. For
accommodate shift work organiza- very complex SBs it allows drastic
tion and improve flexibility at reduction of the time required to
embodiment level. Tasks will be prepare work instructions.
also enriched with information
such as associated kits, location, The second step, planned for the
man-hours and skills as this type of first half of 2006, will give
information is necessary to orga- access to customized SB data,
nize work on an aircraft. filterable in accordance with fleet
configurations.
HYPERLINKS
The third step, based on a new
Hyperlinks will allow navigability SB product structure, will further
between SBs and referenced docu- enhance access to airline data and
ments, such as the Aircraft will enable navigability with
Maintenance Manual. other technical manuals through
new on-line services. This service
Implementation of the ‘fully engi- is planned to be operational
neered SB’ is foreseen in several beginning 2007.
waves, with three major steps, to
give initial benefits immediately. Minimize aircraft
ground-time
The first step introduces manage-
ment by configuration. SB accom-
plishment instructions are struc- The ‘fully engineered SB’ will
tured by configuration to ease minimize aircraft ground-time to
access to data applicable to a spe- some extent and it will also be
cific configuration (Refer to figure enhanced by other innovative ser-
‘Management of accomplishment vices, such as one known as ‘other
instruction per configuration’) and applicable SBs’. This will enable
will be broken down according to retrieval of SBs that could be
the type of work and the work area. embodied at the same time as a
Whenever possible, breakdown given SB as they involve the same
will be in tasks of about 3 to 4 zones or access. This offers the
opportunity to reduce the global
Management of accomplishment time required for accomplishment
instruction per configuration of these other SBs if they were per-
formed separately.
Improved supplier
performance
The airline community expects
Airbus to be more involved in sup-
plier activities and contribute to a
good supplier performance. On-
line access to Vendor Service
Bulletins (VSBs) covered by an
Airbus SB has been operational on
Airbus On-Line Services since
April 2005, giving a more effi-
cient, easier access to VSBs via a
single point of contact (Refer to
figure ‘How to access VSB on
Airbus On-Line Services).
26
RFID - SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
1.
2.
3.
1.An RFID reader
2.RFID tag size
3.Text name plate with RFID tag
29
63TSAF
RFID - SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
RFID tags are essentially micro- unique identification and history. It
chips, and mostly referred to as is not sufficient to know the num-
transponders, tags or RFID chips. ber of units received, but more
The RFID tags always listen for specifically: where did the part
radio signals sent by RFID readers. come from, where was it installed,
When a tag receives a radio query, it how many hours was it operated,
responds by transmitting its unique who repaired it, who installed what
identification frequency code and type of software last and so on. It
data back to the source of the radio requires short distance reading to
signal. Depending on the required ensure accurate readings, with
range, the RFID tag works either communication taking place exclu-
without its own energy source (pas- sively with a single tag at a reading
sive system) or with its own energy distance within centimetres.
source (active system). Passive
RFID tags are powered by the radio The chips used in Airbus applica-
signal that wakes them up and trig- tions are set today at a capacity of
gers an answer. 4 kilobytes with dimensions of
just 8 millimetres (0.31 in.) in
Today's conventional use of RFID diameter and can be flush metal
identification requirements are mounted.
mostly of low data density, while
the benefit for the aviation industry RFID benefits
lies in the high data density that is
needed for tracing. The aviation industry is similar to
other organizations in looking for
Data density types
efficiency enhancements and cost
savings and the supply chain for
Which type of data density is spares, tools and similar goods is
applied depends on the actual task recognised as an area offering
requirements. potential. Interfaces within supply
chains and the associated adminis-
LOW DATA DENSITY tration and information flow are
areas where efficiency can be sig-
Low data density is mostly used for nificantly improved through using
simple information listing, i.e. RFID functionality.
informing the RFID reader of the
number of identical items within Among the many advantages of
one package. Long distance reading RFID over the widely used bar cod-
for total data capture is possible. ing is its ability to read the data
Communication with several tags contained in the chip, without line The RFID
simultaneously under an anti colli- of sight, with the data instantly frequencies applied
sion system is also possible. The transferred by radio waves. This in different countries of the
anti collision system enables the allows, for example, reading of
world:
reader to receive data from each tag periodical check information of
on a one-by-one basis. When multi- oxygen masks installed in an air- •The frequency used for
ple tags are in the same radio fre- craft without the need to take them lowdata densityis from 860
quency and transmit data together, out from behind ceiling panels. to 950 MHz and typical
the reader communicates with the deployment is for transport
tags to prevent the collision of data. Suppliers can use RFID to ensure crates,logistic systems and
This is, for example, accomplished parts are genuine, reducing the risk warehousing.
by transmitting a gap pulse. of unapproved parts entering the •The RFID frequency used
supply chain. for high densityis 13.56
HIGH DATA DENSITY MHz and is currently the
Data recorded, such as repair histo- sole frequency recognised
High data density is used for trac- ry or cycle time information, are and used as standard
ing of goods when a complete, shared so that the integrity and frequency for RFID
unambiguous part history is need- dynamic historycan be established, worldwide.
ed,as in the aviation industry.Each leading to increased maintenance
component that is traced has a reliability and aircraft safety.
63TSAF
RFID
Radio Frequency IDentification
Supporting the aircraft supply chain
Around the world, organizations mandate their This article provides an update on Airbus RFID
business partners to tag their goods with Radio activities subsequent to the article published in
Frequency Identification (RFID) devices. For FAST 30. It gives an overview of Airbus RFID
example, one of the biggest US supermarket activities and achievements and the positive
chains insists that its top suppliers tag their crates effect of RFID on the aircraft spares supply chain.
with RFID from 2005 onwards. RFID is an auto-
mated identification system, which allows touch The article further describes the individual steps
free identification of goods or shipments within taken towards a total integration of RFID into a
process control, tracking and tracing as well as companies ERP (Enterprise Resource Planning)
functions in many other areas of the supply chain. environment and gives information on Airbus
leading industry activities to define RFID
RFID is used today in many aspects of daily life, standards.
such as access passes to security areas, toll pay-
ment stations, logistics and anti theft protection.
However, the technological basis applied for such
purposes is different from the one needed for the
aviation industry.
Andreas Teufel
Airbus Customer Services
Director Spares Marketing/On-site Support
Spares Support and Services
28
RFID - SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
31
63TSAF
RFID - SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
While marking, tracking and shar- marking for safety and authenticity The integration is fully applied for RFID systems that cover Safety in flight aboard
ing is common in many industries, reasons is recognized, though these and transferable to other RFID identification cards and smart
commercial aircraft
the really important aspect for the can depend on the part and its envi- users that want to link RFID to ERP labels and ATA Spec 2000 for
aviation industry lies in RFIDs ronment. Therefore, permanent systems. definition of data structure
In cooperation with a European charter airline,
potential to trace - addressing parts marking must be applied
Airbus has performed in-flight tests of RFID
essential safety aspects of parts according to the differing needs, AIRBUS INITIATIVES FOR RFID and
tags carried on Airbus A320 aircraft.
originality. Tracing means captur- Airbus actively promotes available RFID STANDARDIZATION
safety aspects
During over 6,000 documented flight hours in
ing the current status of the part technologies such as text nameplates, AND DEPLOYMENT
and creating its history records. and barcodes and is researching the 12 aircraft,tests were conducted with zero
possibilities of the RFID technology. The most important objective for For RFID use on aircraft, the main defects.The tag received unlimited approval
Typical traceable information RFID use is to define an interna- requirement is that RFID devices from the German Airworthiness Authorities
includes: The benefits of RFID described tional standard for the data fields need to be of high integrity and (LBA) after this successful test,paving the
•Part history and status, i.e. modi- previously mean that the whole and frequencies. radio frequencystable. way for future airworthiness approval of the
fications, software versions process can be made quicker, more technology.
• Calibration efficient and less costly. Therefore, Airbus leads the international National airworthiness authorities
• Certification Airbus is investigating the possibil- standardization activities through are working on the airworthiness Safety for tag
• Authorized documents ities of deploying RFID on future active participation at steering approval and regulations policy for
Resistance to physical impact
• Updated information aircraft programmes and will con- boards and regular industry confer- passive RFID to be used on board
• Unambiguous part identification tinue to lead industry activities to ences. civil aircraft. The Federal Aviation Together with EADS Astrium in Bremen,
standardize RFID, develop new Agency (FAA) issued a policy
Airbus performed safety tests with RFID tags
The advantages of tracing have led projects and finally promote wide- Airbus also participates in the guidance memo for 13.56 MHz
to identify any risk of defect or interference in
to RFID being widelyintroduced to spread application of RFID tech- ATA Spec 2000 Chapter 9 Task passive RFID on 13th April 2005.
the hostile environments common in
manage supply chains from manu- nology where it is applicable under Force, Permanent Bar Code Parts
commercial aircraft operation.Tags were
facturing, to shipping, to stocking security and cost effective aspects. Identification and actively pursues Airbus expects the FAA memo to
store shelves. a continuous dialogue with cus- be followed by similar action from exposed to severe conditions followed by read
SOFTWARE ASPECTS tomers, suppliers and other aircraft the European Aviation Safety and write experiments.Safety tests included
The Air Transport Association OF RFID manufacturers. Agency (EASA). temperature changes,chemical liquid
(ATA) has also added an RFID exposure,humidity,lightning induced
standard to its Spec 2000 e-busi- Special read/write software for Airbus main objectives are: The main objectives of such a safe- transient susceptibility,electrostatic
ness applications for the aviation RFID applications was created to • Define harmonized ty policy are that data of parts must discharge,shock and vibration as well as fire
parts industry. read, write, and add data on the identification information be accessible any time, anywhere, impact.None of the physical impacts had
chip. As the software is independent, • Develop tag data standards by anyone and need to be in line
negative effects on the read write
Airbus vision it can be used with any system • Define passive and active RFID with data protection rights.
functionality or data integrity.Neither did
allowing integration into all existing usage in close cooperation with
for RFID the hostile test environment cause defects in
data processing systems. regulation authorities Components need to be easily
the tags.The tag is resistant against a
• Develop an agreed standard traceable with a full transparency
temperature range from minus 50°Celsius
Airbus recognized the potential of Special software is also required to for data exchange between of the product life cycle and the
RFID early on (see“Airbus’RFID transfer the data into companies different parties while possibility of verifying informa- to plus 70°Celsius,safe against aggressive
chronology”) and since then has Enterprise Resource Planning sys- considering existing aviation tion on line 24/7 from one central liquids and safe from electromagnetic
actively led RFID activities in the tem. Airbus uses a specially devel- standards such as ISO secure database. interference (EMI).Certification of conformity
aviation industry. oped interface for RFID data (International Standards to RTCA DO-160 was received from EADS
The necessity for permanent parts exchange with Airbus' ERP system. Organization) standards laboratory Astrium Bremen.
Safety for data access
An important aspect is authorized password
protection for data access and modification
and also to back-up data on the ERP system.
Safety for part security
The destruction of a tag needs to be ensured
if removed from a part or tool.It is essential
to prevent counterfeit parts equipped with
tags from scrapped components.Each tag
must have a valid serial number.
Manufacturers can use the chip to prevent
unapproved parts entering the supply chain.
63TSAF
Radio frequency
applications for RFID
High Frequency (HF):
13.56MHZ
Today's sole worldwide standard RFID
frequency
Ultra High Frequency (UHF):
862 - 960MHZ
Standard frequency range useable for
RFID,but currently not commonly applied
worldwide.
•USA 902-928MHz
•Europe 865-868MHz
•Japan 950 - 956MHz
•Korea 910 - 914MHz
•Australia 923 - 928MHZ
•China approx.900MHz
Airbus' RFID chronology
1997-RFID deployment on Airbus
tools for loan service business
1998-Development of RFID
infrastructure and application
1999-Further gain of practical
experience with operation under RFID
2002-Airbus initiates global
standardization activity on RFID in aviation
2003-Airbus developed book of
technical requirements for RFID
2003-ATA Spec 2000 chapter 9 was
renamed “Automatic Identification &
Capturing”
2003-Successful onboard aircraft test of
RFID with resulting unlimited approval by
German National Airworthiness Authorities
(LBA)
2004-ATASpec 2000:First RFID section
with basic requirements embodied
2005-ATA Spec 2000:Mandatory data
elements are defined
2006-Airbus Singapore warehouse to
operate under RFID
30
RFID - SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
33
63TSAF
RFID - SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
1
The cycle starts in the ERP
system with a customer order,
which triggers an event in the
SCEM, starting the process.
The ordered tool is then
prepared for delivery to the
customer.
2
The forwarder collects the tool
shipment and updates the
transportation data in the ERP
system, resulting in a message
that creates an event in the
SCEM. The message is then
passed via the middleware
to the RFID reader and written
on the shipments tag and tool
box.
3
The data is now available elec-
tronically and online, both on
the RFID tags and via the
SCEM capability on the
Internet and can be accessed
by the authorized supply chain
parties.
4
When the tool is delivered to
the customer bythe forwarder, The instant availability of adminis-
Airbus Loan Process ERP
the delivery is acknowledged trational data provides better trans-
Supply chain event Management
through a mobile device via the parency of the supply chain, there-
&RFID
Internet signalling the SCEM by minimizing idle time and
that the delivery is complete. improving tool availability. The
The tool data and status is next step will be to integrate cus-
available in the SCEM and on- tomers and freight carriers into the
line at every stage in the RFID processes. They will then be
process enabling efficient ship- able to update the data on the chip
ment tracking and routing and track the location of a particu-
between customers, repair shop lar tool using the SCEM via the
and Airbus warehouses. Internet.
5
Once the customer returns the
tool, the tag on the tool is read
and the SCEM automatically
notifies quality inspection by
email, avoiding any delay in
the internal process. After this
a quality inspection and pack-
ing is carried out. Once this is
notified, the tool is registered
as quality inspected and ready
for delivery again.
Processes possible today include
the return of tools to the tool shop
by customers, transfer of tools
from warehouse to repair shop, and
return of tools from repair shop to
the warehouse.
63TSAF
RFID/ERP • Faster loan tool re-availability
due to streamlined process and
integration thus reduced stock levels
• Possibility to completely trace
at Airbus tools
the part's history from cradle
tograve
for loan service
• Faster and more accurate loan
invoicing
In 1997 Airbus started to deploy
RFID in its tools business. The HOW IT WORKS
motivation for this innovative step
was the intention to provide a bet- The Airbus supply chain manage-
ter, quicker service to customers by ment activities for tools are based
improving the efficiency of admin- on an ERP Supply Chain Event
istration in the tool loan business. Manager (SCEM), which is the
By introducing RFID, Airbus was central system, functioning
able to reduce the Turn around between the Airbus back office
Time (TAT) by over 25% and ERP system and the RFID infra-
processes throughout the supply- structure consisting of tag, RFID
chain were accelerated, among reader and middleware. The mid-
them for good data entries and dleware is a software specifically
quality inspection due to faster and developed for Airbus to ensure
more accurate data availability. communication between the RFID
reader and the SCEM. The SCEM
As a result, tools managed with is linked to the ERP system via an
RFID had a higher effective avail- ERP application interface. Using
ability, in addition reduced paper- an ERP exchange infrastructure,
work and error rates led to signifi- the management console commu-
cantly reduced administration. nicates with the RFID middleware
via an XML (eXtensible Markup
Some of the other significant Language) interface. The data is
results included: then written to or read from the tag
• Higher data accuracydue to via the RFID server.The interface
automatic data capture and is open to allow incorporation of
avoidance of carry forward and bar code scanning or other SCEM
multiplying data entry mistakes or ERP standard interfaces at a
• Easier, faster and improved later date. The SCEM triggers the
flow of information between all process and workflows, both inter-
participants in the supply chain nallyand externally.
Complete paperwork available on RFID tags Benefits of RFID in
the tool loan business
•Last certificate •Dimensions - length,weight,
•Original receipt number height •Less (or no) paperwork
•Last check •Owner •Leaner administration
•Simple and accurate exchange of
•Original certificate •Next check
data
•Part number •Test laboratory
•Standardized documentation in
•Tool set •Manufacturer
compliance with aerospace industry
•No.of units •Original receipt date vendor
standard ATA Spec 2000
•Periodic check code •Last receipt date •Instant availability of all the
•Serial number •Customs code necessary data with the tool
•Designation •Shipping information •Repair order on the tag
•Improved repair management •Net / gross tare •Shipping advice
•Availability of next shipping address
32
RFID- SUPPORTING THE AIRCRAFT SUPPLY CHAIN
Airbus promotion AIRBUS WAREHOUSE TO OPERATE
FULLY WITH RFID
of RFID
Airbus is evaluating the launch of
a pilot project for an all RFID
applications
warehouse. Once a go-ahead
decision has been taken, RFID can
Airbus is actively promoting RFID be introduced in three steps:
through various projects of the • Tools & ground support
RFID application, for example in equipment will be equipped
cargo and luggage handling and also with RFID
facilitates knowledge transfer on • Repair management and
these applications to customers quality inspection will be
through regular conferences. For managed via RFID
this purpose, Airbus is creating a • RFID will be extended to all
knowledge database for future cus- spares stored in this
tomer access. warehouse
The most important next step is the UNAPPROVED PARTS IDENTIFICATION CONTACT DETAILS
revision of the ATA Spec 2000 and PROJECT.
Andreas Teufel general agreement from the FAA Airbus has launched a project
Airbus Customer Services and EASA. with a university to provide a
Director Spares Marketing
means for the identification of
/On-site Support
Airbus has started several projects to unapproved parts in aircraft Spares Support and Services
Tel:+49 (0) 40507 62320 further test RFID technology in the engines through RFID.
Fax:+49 (0) 40507 62155 aerospace environment. The selec-
andreas.teufel@airbus.com tion process for the solution RFID IN LOGISTICS FOR
http://spares.airbus.com
providers has already started. MANUFACTURING
Airbus has launched a project
Carlo K.Nizam
Airbus Customer Services CERTIFICATION OF RFID TAGS AS with a university to investigate
Head of Business Systems REPLACEMENT OF YELLOW TAGS and deploy the use of RFID in the
Improvement Airbus puts great emphasis on the logistics of manufacturing.
Tel:+44 (0) 11793 64119 elimination of paper documents for
Fax:+44 (0)11793 65133
supplier parts. By application of CABIN INTERIOR PARTS carlo.nizam@airbus.com
RFID, the so-called Yellow Tags Airbus has launched a project to
Jens Heitmann identifying the quality control equip specific cabin interior parts
Airbus Customer Services status of a part will no longer be with RFID to support catering
Head of Systems/Equipment
required. requirements. Standardization
Tel:+49 (0) 40743 75991
Fax:+49 (0)40743 77998
jens.heitmann@airbus.com
63
TSAF
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THAE RWTIOCRLLED
Customer Support Centres
Training centres Spares centres / Regional warehouses
Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
RCSM location Country
Louisville United States of America
Luton United Kingdom
Macau S.A.R. China
Madrid Spain
Manchester United Kingdom
Manila Philippines
Mauritius Mauritius
Memphis United States of America
Mexico City Mexico
Miami United States of America Milan Italy
Minneapolis United States of America
Montreal Canada
Moscow Russia
Mumbai India
Nanchang China
Nanjing China
New York United States of America
Newcastle Australia
Ningbo China
Noumea New Caledonia
Palma de Mallorca Spain
Paris France
Paro Bhutan
Phoenix United States of America
Pittsburgh United States of America
Prague Czech Republic
Qingdao China
Quito Ecuador
Conclusion Rome Italy
Sana’a Yemen
San Francisco United States of America
San Salvador El Salvador
Santiago Chile
Sao Paulo Brazil
RFID implementation in the tools loan A future step will be to use RFID Seoul South Korea
Shanghai China
service has resulted in significant technology to manage certain groups of Sharjah United Arab Emirates
improvements in service to customers and aircraft spares. Shenyang China
reductions in administration.There are Shenzhen China
Singapore Singapore
multiple continuing qualitative advantages Airbus will continue heading industry Sydney Australia
contributing further to efficiency and activities to define and implement industry Taipei Taiwan
Tashkent Uzbekistan
administrative reductions.The next steps standards. Tehran Iran
will be to enable freight carriers to manage Tokyo Japan
Toronto Canada
the physical processes of the tool loan Tulsa United States of America
service by themselves. Tunis Tunisia
Vienna Austria
Washington United States of America
Xi'an China
Zurich Switzerland
34
63
TSAF
Customer support
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Philippe Bordes
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3464
CHINA
Ron Bollekamp
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +86 10 804 86161 RCSM location Country
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates
Algiers Algeria
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT Al-Manamah Bahrain
ADMINISTRATION Amman Jordan
Jean-Philippe Guillon Amsterdam Netherlands
Athens Greece
Director Auckland New Zealand
Resident Customer Support Administration Baku Azerbaijan
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02 Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Bangalore India Bangkok Thailand
Barcelona Spain
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Beirut Lebanon
Airbus has its main Spares centre in Hamburg, Brasilia Brazil
and regional warehouses in Frankfurt, Brussels Belgium
Budapest Hungary
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Buenos Aires Argentina
Cairo Egypt
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Casablanca Morocco
AOG Technical and Spares calls. Charlotte United States of America
Chengdu China
Colombo Sri Lanka
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Copenhagen Denmark
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Dalian China
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Damascus Syria
Delhi India
support.airtac@airbus.com
Denver United States of America
Derby United Kingdom
Spares AOGs in North America should be Detroit United States of America
addressed to: Dhaka Bangladesh
Doha Qatar
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000
Dubai United Arab Emirates
Fax:+1 (703) 729 4373 Dublin Ireland
Duluth United States of America
Spares AOGs outside North America Dusseldorf Germany
Fort Lauderdale United States of America
should be addressed to:
Frankfurt Germany
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 3001/3002/3003 Guangzhou China
Fax:+49 (40) 50 76 3011/3012/3013 Hangzhou China
Hanoi Vietnam
Helsinki Finland
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Hong Kong S.A.R. China
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Indianapolis United States of America
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Istanbul Turkey
Jakarta Indonesia
Jinan China
Airbus Training subsidiaries
Johannesburg South Africa
Miami, USA - Florida Karachi Pakistan
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Kuwait city Kuwait
Lanzhou China
Beijing, China Larnaca Cyprus
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Lisbon Portugal
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 London United Kingdom
35
A DOUBLE-DECKER OF FIFTY YEARS AGO...
A double-decker of fifty years ago…
63
TSAF
The first flight of the A380 in April 2005
generated unprecedented worldwide publicity and
caught the attention of the general public concerning large
double-deck aircraft.
However, the A380 is not the first double-deck aircraft, there have been a
number of them over the years, one of which was the Breguet 763 airliner.
Design work on this aircraft started in 1936 with the Breguet 730 prototype, but was
postponed due to the Second World War. In 1946, work started again and the prototype,
designated Breguet 761, made its first flight at Villacoublay in France on 15 February 1949.
A heavier version was then introduced, designated the 763 Provence, which was destined for
Air France and flew mainly on the route from Paris to Algiers from 1953 to 1971.
A final version of the aircraft, the 765 Sahara, was built for the French Air Force and flew for
the first time in July 1958. This version was heavier, modified for military use and had longer
range. It remained in service until 1969 when the Transall replaced it.
In its day, it was an impressive aircraft, but a comparison of its characteristics with the state-of-
the-art A380 shows just how far the aviation industry has come in the fifty-six years since this
double-decker first flew.
The Breguet 765 characteristics were:
Wingspan: 45.5m (149ft)
Length: 29m (95ft)
Height: 10.15m (33ft)
Speed: 400km/h (250 miles/hour)
Range: 4000km (2,500 miles)
Payload: 17t freight or 130 passengers
Flight crew: 5
36
.ecnarF
riA
fo
ysetruoc
yB
”ecnarF
riA
eésuM
noitcelloC“
otohP
www.airbusworld.com
AIRMAN AIRcraft Maintenance ANalysis.
He’s flexible and adaptable. He can’t leap tall of in-service live data checks. He can provide
buildings in a single bound but he can run a fleet analysis of available data and
of aircraft. He’s AIRMAN: A unique software tool access to all relevant information
designed to optimise the maintenance of your fleet. He can save millions. For more
Always handy to have around, AIRMAN can reduce contact Airbus Customer Services
aircraft turnaround time. He can provide millions Airbus. Setting the standards
