E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
0
4
T
S
A
F
40
J U L Y 2 0 0 7
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
SPARES,SUPPLIERS & facilitate communication. It inc- A300/A310 FAMILY TECHNICAL
WARRANTY SYMPOSIUM luded some 100 presentations SYMPOSIUM
BANGKOK,THAILAND spread in 12 different sessions TOULOUSE,FRANCE
12-14 MARCH 2007 covering the whole scope of 05-09 NOVEMBER 2007
For the fourth time the event Flight Operations activities Airbus Technical Symposiums
linking spares, supplier and (Operations, Performance, e-doc, are held for each Airbus pro-
warranty services together EFB, all aircraft types issues, gramme every two years with
generated an excellent mix of economics, services…). the target audience of airline
participants from customers The airline participants unani- engineering and maintenance
(53 participants) and suppliers mously mentioned it was a real managers. The next A300/A310
(48 participants) and provided success: ‘This type of confer- event will focus on current
an ideal platform to build on ence is absolutely essential’. technical and maintenance sub-
existing relationships and fur- jects as well as general customer
ther discuss regional specifici- A320 FAMILY SYMPOSIUM support processes. There will be
ties and service strategies. BANGKOK,THAILAND a particular focus on the assur-
Airbus started by presenting the 07-11 MAY 2007 ance of long-term support of the
Customer Services portfolio of Customers supported Airbus fleet with consideration that the
modular support and services aspirations expressed at the last production aircraft will
‘Air+ by Airbus’and underlined the symposium, consisting of con- have been delivered during the
continuing efforts to improve, solidating the high level of summer of 2007.
based on market and customer operational reliability, enhanc-
feedback from the Customer ing Airbus support and services TECHNICAL DATA SUPPORT
Satisfaction Improvement Pro- and maximizing their aircraft AND SERVICES SYMPOSIUM
gramme, and spoke about the availability. TOULOUSE,FRANCE
‘FIRST’ programme, preparing 12-14 NOVEMBER 2007
the next 10 years’ vision. Then This fourth Technical Data
Airbus presented the latest news Symposium will provide a
concerning spares, supplier and unique opportunity for airline
warranty services. technical data managers, main-
tenance engineers and informa-
15TH PERFORMANCE AND tion technology specialists to
OPERATIONS CONFERENCE learn about the latest status of
PUERTO-VALLARTA,MEXICO our technical data products.
23-27 APRIL 2007 Separate, but integrated product
The 15th Performance & Oper- demonstrations and sideshows,
ations Conference representing to complement the main ses-
the greatest forum for Airbus’ sions, will be available through-
Flight Operations Support & out to allow active participation
Services activities. Attended by and an exchange of views.
181 participants from 73 airlines, Advance notification will be
it provided flight crews, opera- made in the near future via our
tions specialists and performance communication channels and
engineers with a unique opportu- invitations will be sent in the
nity to constructively exchange coming months.
views and information and to
04TSAF
44JJ UU LL 00YY 22 00 00 77
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
Publisher: Bruno Piquet
Editor: Kenneth Johnson
Assisted by Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Graphic Designer: Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Authorization for reprint of FAST Magazine articles should be requested
from the editor atthe FAST Magazine e-mail address given below
Customer Services Communications
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
e-mail:fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer:Escourbiac
FAST Magazine may be read on Internet
http://www.content.airbusworld.com/SITES/Customer_services/index.html
under ‘Quick references’
ISSN 1293-5476
©AIRBUS S.A.S.2007.AN EADS COMPANY
All rights reserved.Proprietary document
By taking deliveryof this Magazine (hereafter “Magazine”),you accept on behalf of
your companyto comply with the following.No other property rights are granted by the
deliveryof this Magazine than the right to read it,for the sole purpose of information.
This Magazine,its content,illustrations and photos shall not be modified nor repro-
duced without prior written consent of Airbus S.A.S.This Magazine and the materials
it contains shall not,in whole or in part,be sold,rented,or licensed to any third party
subject to payment or not.This Magazine may contain market-sensitive or other infor-
mation that is correct at the time of going to press.This information involves a number
of factors which could change over time,affecting the true public representation.
Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in this document or
with respect to the information described herein.The statements made herein do not
constitute an offer or form part of any contract.They are based on Airbus information
and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation is given as to their
accuracy.When additional information is required,Airbus S.A.S can be contacted to
provide further details.Airbus S.A.S shall assume no liability for any damage in con-
nection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,even if Airbus S.A.S
has been advised of the likelihood of such damages.This licence is governed by French
law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals of Toulouse (France)
without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for infringement of copy-
right or anyother intellectual property right in anyother court of competent jurisdiction.
Airbus,its logo,A300,A310,A318,A319,A320,A321,A330,
A340,A350,A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
1
04TSAF
44JJ UU LL 00YY 22 00 00 77
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
Going green 2
Working towards environmentally friendly
materials and processes
Thomas McVeigh
A318 steep approach capability 7
Mainline jet comfort and efficiency
into restricted airports
Laurence Bernadac
Daniel Carnelly
The Future Air Navigation System 13
FANS B
Air traffic communications enhancement
for the A320 Family
Sophie de Cuendias
Initial experience from 20
the FAIR-ISP on-line forum
Increasing airlines and Airbus collaboration
on in-service fleet issues
Denis Tissié
The first and the last of the A300/A310 Family 28
Customer Services 29
Around the clock...Around the world
This issue of FAST Magazine has been printed
on paper produced without using chlorine,to reduce Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: waste and help conserve natural resources.
Airbus Photographic Library,exmcompany,H.Goussé,(cover),S.Ognier,Airbus France Every little helps!
1
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
GOING GREEN - WORKING TOWARDS ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY MATERIALS AND PROCESSES
In 2003, Airbus set up an innova- benefits and level of safety and
tive Environmental Management quality in a more pro-environmental
System (EMS) as a key enabler to manner.
help continuously improve the
Airbus initiatives
environmental performance of
Airbus products and services.
Understanding that eventually cer-
In January 2007, Airbus became tain hazardous materials would
the first aerospace company to have to be removed from industry,
receive a corporate certification to Airbus decided to anticipate the
ISO14001 environmental standards changes and launched a number of
from an independent auditor (the initiatives.
highly respected Det Norske
Veritas), covering all the company’s LOW VOLATILE ORGANIC
production sites and products COMPOUNDS (VOC) SURFACE
throughout their lifecycle. This cor- COATINGS
porate certification demonstrates
the efficiency of Airbus EMS and Over the last decade, Airbus has
integrated Life Cycle approach. intensified its efforts to replace
high VOC surface coatings (exter-
nal paints, primers, etc.) by low
What is this
VOC alternatives.This subject is to
integrated Life be expanded upon in a later FAST
article, “Maintenance of aircraft
Cycle approach all
paint systems, ten yearson”.
about?
LOW VOC CONTAINING CLEANING
AGENTS AND PROCESSES
Airbus uses this innovative
approach to map, assess, prioritise Traditional methods and processes
and track all the environmental for general cleaning have histori-
effects an aircraft and the related callyemployed high VOC efficient
production processes have, or may solvents. However, these solvents,
have, at each stage of life; from although capable of performing
design to end-of-life, in a continu- multiple cleaning applications,
ous improvement process. Among
the significant environmental issues
identified throughout the aircraft
life cycle, are the impact of chemi-
cals and manufacturing processes.
Therefore, specific focus is given
in the Life Cycle approach to
research programmes that will lead
to reduction of the environmental
impact of manufacturing, and
similarly, to anticipate chemical
regulations such as REACH (see
information). Airbus has adopted a
policy of replacing hazardous
materials and processes used for
engineering and manufacturing,
wherever feasible, and joining in
efforts by other industry partners.
However, suitable replacement
options are not always readily avail-
able. In such a case, Airbus sets tar-
gets and milestones to develop
alternatives that bring the same
04TSAF
GOING GREEN - WORKING TOWARDS ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY MATERIALS AND PROCESSES
3
04TSAF
iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn
REACH
Registration,Evaluation,
Authorisation of Chemicals
EC n°1907/2006
This new regulation aims to improve
the protection of human health and
the environment while maintaining
competitiveness,and enhancing the
innovative capability of the EU chemicals
industry.REACH will furthermore give
greater responsibility to industry to manage
the risks from chemicals and to provide
safety information that will be passed down
the supply chain.
Going green
Working towards environmentally
friendly materials and processes
Today, global awareness of environmental issues is a fact and the number of regulations is increasing.
Many processes and chemicals used have to be revisited. Traditional engineering and manufacturing
practices are evolving to meet these needs and ‘going green’is becoming a way of thinking that is
affecting all industries worldwide.
In the aviation industrythe commitment of Airbus to environmental efficiency has long been central
to activities and a key driver when it comes to new products, techniques and processes. It can be said
that the environmental impact of building and flying aircraft is a core preoccupation of Airbus since
the beginning. Airbus has sharpened and embedded its environmental approach into an Environment, Investing in
new best practices to
Health and Safety (EHS) policy, designed to align, channel and leverage the separate environmental disassemble and recycle Investing in
initiatives across the company. end-of-cycle research to
Life Cycle design
aircraft
approach cleaner aircraft
Optimising
aircraft operations
& maintenance
Managing the
for enhanced environmental performance supply chain
for a shared vision of
environmental responsibility
Developing intermodal
transport
Thomas McVeigh
solutions for minimal
Senior Engineer
infrastructure footprint Managing the impact of Materials and Technologies
manufacturing
Airbus Customer Services
on the environment thanks
to cleaner technologies and
processes
2
0
GOING GREEN - WORKING TOWARDS ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY MATERIALS AND PROCESSES GOING GREEN - WORKING TOWARDS ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY MATERIALS AND PROCESSES
0
100
65
39
have been rendered obsolete due A number of formulations were be recommended by Airbus to CHROMATE-FREE SURFACE
49 to their potential impacts on envi- tested of which many unfortunately customers and suppliers who wish PROTECTIONS AND PROCESSES
0
ronment and health. provided poor results. It was then to address local environmental
100
decided to take a ‘back to basics’ issues whilst also improving the Airbus has launched a major initia-
39
Two significant domains of theoretical approach with the partic- quality of their cleaning operations. tive towards chromate substitution
improvement in solvent use at ipation of a chemical supplier. From within various applications.
Airbus have been identified. five short listed additives tested HALON FREE EXTINGUISHERS
82
0 only one succeeded in fulfiling and CHROMATE-REDUCED PAINT
28 REPLACEMENT OF CLEANING WITH meeting all of the requirements for a Halon is a compound in which the
52
SOLVENTS BY PRESSURIZED HOT multi-purpose general cleaning hydrogen atoms of a hydrocarbon Chromate-free primers are used for
WATER CONTAINING ADDITIVES process. The final additive enriched have been replaced by bromine and the final paint scheme of the A380.
pressurised hot water process has other halogen atoms.It is still used Airbus is applying the most mod-
0 This consisted of replacing tradi- proved to be extremely efficient and in fire extinguishers under specific ern and environmental friendly
78 tional manual hand cleaning per- has facilitated deletion of the previ- exemption for aviation. techniques for the A380 painting
74
formed by surface flooding (with ous chemical cleaning processes process. Electrostatic paint guns
0
aggressive solvents) and removing using solvents. Over the last four years, Airbus and are used to minimize paint mist.
residual material by wiping with industrial partners have developed Used air is cleaned and washed
cloths. PRE-IMPREGNATED WIPES a halon free engine and auxiliary through a multi-stage cleaning
0
CONTAINING ‘NEW GENERATION’ power unit fire extinguishing sys- process to ensure that paint parti-
60
100 Solvents used were blends of suit- SOLVENT tem with a research project called cles are disposed of separately.
0 able hydrocarbons, ethers, esters ‘ECOLOG’(Extinguishing Concept
and alkyl ketones and the process In parallel to the previously men- Lowering Ozone depletion and CHROMATE-FREE ANODIZING
Pressure cleaning involved a high consumption of tioned cleaning process change, Green house effect). PROCESS
solvent. After two years of research further industrial processes investi-
a new process with zero VOC gation identified the benefits of Following successful testing with Since the introduction of alumini-
emissions was established. During using pre-impregnated disposable a representative system demon- um alloys into aircraft airframe
this research a number of process- cleaning wipes (cloths). This strator, the project was presented construction (which was at that
es were considered before finally allows disposable wipes to be in late 2005 to the Federal time a quantum leap), it soon
choosing a new one. Exhaustive impregnated with a cleaning agent Aviation Administration (FAA) became apparent that under certain
testing demonstrated the limita- suitable for specific applications. and the European Aviation Safety circumstances these alloys pre-
tions of some environmentally Agency (EASA). The concept ferred to return to their natural
friendlyalternatives such as clean- Airbus is currently employing and was seen as so potentially oxide state i.e. ‘dust’; this of
ing bypressurized additive-free hot increasingly introducing the appli- groundbreaking that the FAA course was a rather inconvenient
water. cation of impregnated wipes to launched its own test campaign to and undesirable property.
replace the previous practice of sur- evaluate the new agent’s extin-
The logical progression was to iden- face ‘flooding and wiping’with tra- guishing efficiency. Testing has With the enormous advantages
tify and qualify a non-toxic and ditional solvents. The benefits of been successfully completed, and provided by aluminium alloys (for
non-volatile additive to improve these changes also include support- although the FAA has not mechanical stress and fatigue ben-
cleaning effectiveness. The additive ing the global effort to reduce C0 released their final report, all the efits) it was necessary to find a
2 Anodization tank
selected had to remove all of the emissions by reducing the energy signs so far point to them being solution to preserve and stabilize
various soils and contaminants of used to manufacture and transport extremely positive. When accept- the integrity of these materials.
the manufacturing process and not voluminous and heavy chemicals, ed by the authorities and imple- The turning point in stabilizing
induce degradation (such as corro- and also their waste disposal man- mented, this will become yet these alloys was the pre-oxidizing
sion or embrittlement) of the mate- agement. This improved technology another Airbus step along the of the alloy surface, this process is
rials it was being applied to. is commercially available and can ‘environmental road’. known as ‘anodising’.
04TSAF
5
04TSAF
4
04TSAF
GOING GREEN - WORKING TOWARDS ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY MATERIALS AND PROCESSES A318 STEEP APPROACH CAPABILITY - MAINLINE JET COMFORT AND EFFICIENCY INTO RESTRICTED AIRPORTS
The chrome-based chemicals used Airbus will continue to up-scale
to achieve these protective coatings the new TSAA process throughout
are now targeted as environmental- its manufacturing facilities. This
ly unfriendly. Therefore there is will be implemented at selected
ongoing activity to find more EHS optimum opportunities, which will
acceptable alternatives. not impact or interrupt the current
manufacturing cycle time. The
In 2002 Airbus launched a pro- ongoing programmes will initiate
gramme to investigate possible material and process changes as
friendly alternative anodic process- acceptable state-of-the-art alterna-
es. Following extensive investiga- tives are identified.
tion and research ‘Tartaric
Sulphuric Acid Anodising’(TSAA) For Airbus customers and Main-
proved to be the most suitable tenance Repair and Overhaul
replacement for corrosion preven- centre’s involved with structural
tion. Airbus has introduced this modification and repairs there will
new TSAA anodising process to be no physical change with the
replace the current chromic acid introduction of TSAA technology,
anodising process in one of its the only changes will be reflected
facilities. The change has been in Airbus documentation such as
promoted and introduced by the Structural Repair Manual
A318 steep
Airbus to demonstrate the real pos- (SRM), Consumable Materials List
sibilities for exchanging traditional (CML) and the Process and
(safe and secure) surface technolo- Materials Specification (PMS).
approach capability
gies for new innovative alternative There will be no Airbus restriction
solutions. The new anodic process on the use of consumable material
will allow a higher oxide film and application processes currently
Mainline jet comfort and efficiency
thickness whilst maintaining at used and referenced in the exis-
minimum, the same or better ting Airbus documentation for
performance in fatigue. maintenance and repair. into restricted airports
There are numbers of restricted airports around the world where mainline jet operation is presently
not feasible due to height obstructions, runway length and/or noise restrictions. Perhaps the most
significant of these airports is London City airport, which is shown in the picture above and
described in more detail later.Toanswer this, Airbus has been working towards qualifying the A318
Conclusion
for steep approach since its type certification in May 2003.
This capability will allowmainline jet operations into airfields with steeper than normal approach
requirements due to obstacles or noise constraints.
Airbus’ choice to anticipate Airbus has already achieved a lot in the
This article provides an overviewof the benefits this new capability will bring to the latest A320
Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) introduction of environmentally friendly
regulatory developments and introduce products and processes and is involved in Family member as well as a summary of the technical solutions developed by Airbus to provide this
greener materials and processes is part of many activities to develop cleaner,greener capability.
its commitment to the environment. and smarter materials, processes and
technologies for the future.
Although authorities do not yet mandate
replacement or improvement of some As further EHS improvements become
materials and processes, Airbus believes available Airbus will inform the customer
that research and implementation of community of these through the FAST
greener ways should be done as soon as Magazine or other Customer Services
technically and economically feasible to publications. Environmental information is
Laurence Bernadac Daniel Carnelly
improve EHS. also available through environment, Chief Engineering Product Marketing Manager
economics and social reports on Flight Physics Manager Marketing Division
airbus.com. A320 Family Programme A320 Family Programme
7
04TSAF
0
0
100
65
39
49
0
100
39
82
0
28
52
0
78
74
0
0
60
100
0
CONTACT DETAILS
Thomas McVeigh
Senior Engineer
Materials and Technologies
Airbus Customer Services
Tel: + 33 (0)5 61 93 45 30
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 36 14
thomas.mcveigh@airbus.com
6
A318 STEEP APPROACH CAPABILITY - MAINLINE JET COMFORT AND EFFICIENCY INTO RESTRICTED AIRPORTS A318 STEEP APPROACH CAPABILITY - MAINLINE JET COMFORT AND EFFICIENCY INTO RESTRICTED AIRPORTS
locations such as Bankstown in produce more drag, or less thrust,
Sydney, Australia; Stockholm’s than on a normal approach. Several
Bromma airport or the Reykjavik means are possible to achieve this
city airport. In this case, the steep by use of the existing control sur-
approach can be used as a noise faces, by decreasing engine thrust
abatement procedure. This is on approach, or by the addition of
because at any given distance from drag increasing devices on the
the threshold of the runway, an air- fuselage. To ensure minimum
craft will be higher when making a changes to the aircraft, the use of
5.5 degree approach than when the existing control surfaces was
making a standard 3 degree the preferred solution.
approach. During this phase of
flight, engines are at a low regime The first task was to define an
so the noise source is primarily aerodynamic configuration that
aerodynamic, but the higher an would produce more drag than
approach is over residential neigh- the classical high lift configura-
bourhoods the better for the people tion in approach with minimum
living there. lift degradation. Any change in
the landing configuration resulting
As airports expand and the envi- in decreased lift would necessitate
ronmental constraints become increasing approach speed to
stronger, the steep approach balance it, which must be avoided
capability combined with the to prevent lengthening of landing
lower fuel burn than the jets that distance and degradation of land-
the A318 will replace enhance ing performance. This was particu-
the aircraft’s‘green’credentials. larly important for LCY airport,
due to the very short runway and
was a key driver in the choice of
Aircraft and
the A318 steep approach configu-
operational ration. To achieve the objective an
aerodynamic configuration using
modifications
the classical high lift configuration
at landing, plus partial airbrakes
The landing configuration of the extension was defined. This exten-
A318 was initially designed to pro- sion was optimized for the best
vide an optimum performance at compromise between descent per-
landing for standard approaches, formance and lift degradation, with
which are usually performed on a only two spoilers (3 and 4)
flight path of 3 degrees. It was clear deployed over the three normally
from the beginning that this normal used in the speedbrake function,
landing configuration was inade- and deflected with the same angle.
quate to provide the desired descent The final configuration and deflec-
performance during a steep tion angle of 30 degrees were
approach. Hence, the first chal- validated in flight test.
lenge was to define an approach
configuration that would enable After this, the crew interface
flying the aircraft on a steep flight and system adaptations were
path angle of 5.5 degrees. This tar- developed to minimize steep
get was fixed in view of operations approach specificities in opera-
at LCY airport. According to the tions. Selection of the steep
steep approach regulations, the air- approach mode is done by a push
craft must demonstrate the targeted button on the overhead panel in the
approach plus 2 degrees margin, cockpit, which arms the mode and
meaning the configuration had to checks system availability. The
allowthe aircraft to flyaflight path mode then becomes activeonce the
of 7.5 degrees. landing configuration is selected
and the speedbrakes are deflected.
To achieve this approach path The cockpit displays are adapted to
angle, the aircraft must either provide the crew with relevant
9
04TSAF
6
30
0
29
91
0
Why steep LCY airport is perhaps the most
16
significant example of one of the
31 approach
challenging environments that this
61
0 requirements are capability was developed for. It is
located very close to the financial
needed?
district of London and is much
more convenient for people who
23
18 The need to have a steep approach live and work in this area than
By courtesy of London City airport
38 capability to operate into airports Heathrow or Gatwick airports, as it
0 that have a challenging obstacle is only a 15 minute journey away.
environment and already require Furthermore, due to the size of the
such a capability for operation airport and the volume of passen-
0 today is self-evident. Whether it is gers, the time from check-in,
100 large buildings at city centre air- through security and to the aircraft
65 ports, prime amongst which is is much shorter (10 to 15 minutes
39
London City airport (LCY), or air- against up to two hours at the
ports in mountainous terrain such major hubs). LCY airport is there-
as Sion or Lugano (both in fore much more convenient for the
49 Switzerland), it is Airbus’aim to be London financial community than
0
able to bring mainline jet comfort other London airports. However,
100
39 into airports where larger aircraft this airport can only be served
have struggled to operate due to todaybyturboprops and the previ-
obstacle constraints. Often these ous generation of 100 seat jets due
82 airports also have short runways – to its obstacle constraints. The
0 again usually due to the obstacle A318 will allow operators to offer
28 environment around them – and it a superior on-board product than
52
is obvious why an A318 steep that offered today, often matching
approach capability becomes that already in service with their
Aerodynamic configuration
important. When combined with mainline fleet of A320 Family air-
0 the ‘Florence Kit’(seeinformation), craft, as the A318 offers exactly the
78
a series of hardware and software same cabin, seat width and comfort
74
0 modifications including the levels as the rest of the family. This
upward deflection of ailerons to act is doubly so now that the Enhanced
iinnffoorrmmaattiioonn as spoilers, that has been designed Cabin for the A320 Family has
to improve the landing perfor- come into service.
0
mance characteristics of the A320 60
The ‘Florence Kit’i1s 0a0 set of modifications Family, the steep approach capa- A city airport capability is also of
developed first on th0e A319 to improve bility turns the A318 into a benefit to the A318 Elite,the cor-
landing performance at Florence airport in superb performer not just able to porate version of the A318,which
Italy.This kit is now also available on the serve existing routes but also to has the steep approach capabili-
A318.It consists of: open newones for the first time. ty fitted as basic equipment.
• Using the ailerons as spoilers on the When combined with the Auxiliary
This capability becomes doubly Centre Tank, this means that large
ground (upward deflection) to improve
important as the A318 is the only private jet levels of comfort can be
braking efficiency
100 seat airliner to have a steep brought to city centre airports that
• Defining an alternate forward centre of
approach capability that is in previously could not handle such a
gravity limit that enables decrease of
production today. Also, passen- large corporate aircraft. For this
the approach speed,thus improving
gers prefer to have a jet service market, in particular, time is
the landing performance rather than a turboprop one. Due money and so the closer that the
largely to all A320 Family mem- individuals who use such aircraft
bers sharing the same wing and can arrive to city centre financial
engines (in the case of the district locations, the better.
CFM56), the A318 has an excel-
lent take-off performance that A second, and perhaps less obvi-
almost doubles the range capabili- ous, use for the steep approach
ty offered bythe 100 seat jets that capability is what makes the A318
it will eventually replace – and a good neighbour for residents
whilst burning up to 40% less fuel living close to airports, particu-
per seat. larly once again for those in city
8
04TSAF
Top of descent – P/B switched ON
9
A318 STEEP APPROACH CAPABILITY - MAINLINE JET COMFORT AND EFFICIENCY INTO RESTRICTED AIRPORTS A318 STEEP APPROACH CAPABILITY - MAINLINE JET COMFORT AND EFFICIENCY INTO RESTRICTED AIRPORTS
You are too high. You are on the guide path. You are below the guide path.
information on the mode availabili- Other systems and flight control
PAPI (Precision Approach Path Indicator)
ty once selected. From a cockpit laws modifications have been
and general crew interface point introduced to accommodate the
of view, steep approach proce- new steep approach configuration
dures have been made as similar and ensure that it provides appro-
as possible to the existing Airbus priate handling qualities and flight
standard. protections during approach. For
example, Airbus has improved the
Due to the increased flight path existing steep approach mode for
angle during a steep approach air- ground proximity warning and
craft vertical speed is increased and traffic collision avoidance systems
the landing becomes more dynamic (EGPWS-T2CAS) and proposed a
than a classical one. Hence, the specific envelope with alert thresh-
need to break the aircraft trajectory olds adapted to the specific descent
Ifall ofthe PAPI system Ifonly the light on the When you are on the Ifonlythelight on the Ifall of the PAPI system before touchdown is of primary rate of the A318. This alert allows
lights arewhite, you are right isred and theother guide path, the two left is white and the lights are red, you are
importance. There-fore, special avoiding excessive flight path
too high. are white, you are lights on the left are otherare red, youare below the guide path.
care was given to the flare phase for angle excursion away from the slightly high. white andthetwolights slightly low.
which two specific features were steep glide. Modifications were onthe rightarered.
developed to assist the crew. made to flight control laws in gen-
• The first was the introduction eral, the aim being to provide the
of a dedicated audio callout same level of safety in steep
during final approach that approach configuration as in any A320 training. Operational pilot For this purpose, a visual guidance
guides the pilot to the correct other landing configuration. training will of course remain nec- system called PAPI (Precision
moment to flare the aircraft. Modifications address some points essaryon site whenever the airfield Approach Path Indicator) was
• The second one, patented of the angle of attack protection, characteristics require so, as for installed at Toulouse Blagnac air-
byAirbus, is a partial auto- the speedbrake logic and some any other aircraft. Airbus training port to guide the aircraft through an
retraction of the speedbrakes parts of the longitudinal law for the department will provide training approach at 5.5 degrees.
just beforeflarethat limits flare. The autopilot was also tuned tools (Flight Crew Training
pitch attitude variation during as well to be as effective as for Manual and eBriefing), but no The first objectiveof this flight test
flare. This is transparent to nominal operations. simulator or other training session campaign was to check general
the crewbut efficient for will be required as it is considered handling qualities and perfor-
their aircraft handling as it Thanks to these features, no dedi- to be easilymanageable to fly steep mance in steep approach condi-
allows them to maintain cated pilot training will be neces- approaches. tions through free air assessment of
avisual external reference sary to become familiar with steep the new aerodynamic configura-
during flare as close as approaches on the A318. All pilots Standard operating procedures tion. Secondly,much effort was put
possible to a classical approach qualified on the A320 Family have been defined for steep into the flare phase assessment and
while naturally generating aircraft will be able to fly steep approaches based on the extensive an extensive campaign was carried
the lift necessary to break approaches on the A318 without flight test campaign performed on out to assess approach, flare and
the trajectory. training other than the classical the A318 and will be introduced landing in any aircraft configura-
into the operational documentation. tion with a wide panel of flight test
pilots. Another goal of this cam-
An extensive flight paign was to validate the adapta-
tion of flight control and display
test campaign
computers. All these flight tests
were necessaryto develop a robust
All these modifications were devel- configuration for steep approach
oped and tested in several steps to and certify the configuration.
reach the targeted level of maturity
of the steep approach function. A total of 45 flights, representing
Tests were first performed in a sim- 70 flight test hours and 220 land-
ulator where the LCY airport envi- ings were performed to achieve
ronment was reproduced to this target. This amount of flight
improve the accuracy of the visual tests performed with many differ-
scene (steep approach on a short ent crews and various flight condi-
and narrow runway). Then the con- tions is the key to maturity of the
figuration was fitted on a prototype function at entry-into-service.
A318 for flight tests with different Once the design was well
pilots to complete development advanced, airline pilots were also
and certification of the function. invited to participate in steep
11
04TSAF
6
30
0
29
91
0
16
31
61
0
23
18
38
0
0
100
65
39
49
0
100
39
82
0
28
52
0
78
74
0
0
60
100
0
10
04TSAF
11
A318 STEEP APPROACH CAPABILITY - MAINLINE JET COMFORT AND EFFICIENCY INTO RESTRICTED AIRPORTS
CONTACT DETAILS
Laurence Bernadac Daniel Carnelly
Chief Engineering Product Marketing Manager
Flight Physics Manager Marketing Division
A320 Family Programme A320 Family Programme
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 14 48 Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 81 92
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 07 58 Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 31 01
laurence.bernadac@airbus.com daniel.carnelly@airbus.com
The steep approach capability of the are required. Introduction of a Head-up
A318 will allow it to replace the previous Display, which is ongoing at the moment,
generation of 100 seat jets and some will also enhance the ease of operating
larger turboprops, bringing the major steep approaches. Finally, A318 steep
benefits of A320 Family comfort levels and approaches can bring reduced noise
the preferred feel of a ‘big jet’ to levels to airport communities and enhance
passengers at restricted airports such as the aircraft’s ‘green’ credentials.
those mentioned previously, others like
Paro in Bhutan, or in the Americas Installation of the steep approach features
(depending on authority approval for steep will be available as an option for the A318,
approaches). Reduced fuel burn and the and proposed as standard for its
range to offer passenger’snew Corporate Jet version, the A318 ELITE.
destinations that could not be previously
served from restricted airports are benefits Certification of the A318 steep approach
for operators. capability for models with Pratt & Whitney
PW6000 engines was granted by the
The easiness of flying steep approaches European Aviation Safety Agency on
with the A318 is also an operational 19 June 2007 and is expected in the
benefit, as no exceptional pilot skills or fourth quarter of 2007 for CFM56-5B
extra training (other than airport specific) poweredaircraft.
04TSAF
approach flight tests to gather These last trials were witnessed
operational comments on the by EASA (European Aviation
design and associated procedures. Safety Authority) representatives
and by airline pilots who were
In addition, complementary testing enthusiastic about the easiness of
was performed at LCY airport to flying steep approaches with the
acquire knowledge of a real airport A318.
environment (traffic, air traffic
control, obstacles) and check the AnAirbus team captured the noise
configuration was adequate in this signatures of the aircraft during
environment. This technical evalu- take-offs with the results that the
ation also gave an opportunity to perceived noise levels of the A318
check the aircraft compatibility were lowerthan those of other air-
with the airport’s tough noise craft operating the same day.
requirements. Two campaigns were
successively organized in May and This flight testing demonstra-
October 2006, first with a fully ted the adequacy of the A318
instrumented prototype aircraft, for operations at LCY airport,
and second with a production air- including ground manoeuvring.
craft on which the steep approach
entry-into-service package was
embodied.
Conclusion
12
04TSAF
6
30
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
0
29
91
0
16
31
61
0
23
18
38
0
0
100
65
39
49
0
100
39 The Future Air
82 Navigation System
0
28
52
FANS B
0
78 Air traffic communications
74
0
enhancement for the A320 Family
0
60
100
0
In today’s busy Air Traffic Control (ATC) environment, and especially in high-density continental
airspace, congestion on the voice channels used by air traffic controllers and pilots can be one of
the limiting factors in sector capacity and safety.
Most messages on the voice channels are for routine activities such as the transfer of voice
communications, flight level requests and clearances, route and heading clearances and requests,
speed clearances and Secondary Surveillance Radar (SSR) code changes. Pilots and controllers
need to exchange information in a flexible, reliable and secure manner.
Sophie de Cuendias
Design Manager
Upgrade Services
Airbus Customer Services
13
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
04TSAF
100
39
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
82
0
28
52
The pioneer airlines are presently: function will typically be initiated
0 Finnair, Aeroflot-Russian Interna- when an aircraft is either at the gate
78
tional Airlines, Air Berlin, in the pre-departure phase of flight,
74
Air Europa, Airbus Transport or before entering a new Flight
0
International, Alitalia, American Information Region (FIR) support-
Airlines, Federal Express, Niki, ing data link communications.
Hapag-Lloyd, Lufttransport Unter- It provides the ground with the
0
nehmen, Lufthansa, Lufthansa necessary information to make
60
100 City Line, Malev, Scandinavian data link communications possible
0 Airlines and SAS Braathens. between the controller and the
Tarom-Romanian Air Transport is aircraft:
also considering joining. Currently, • Aircraft 24 bit address
these airlines operate more than • Aircraft flight identification
600 Airbus aircraft and have com- • Departure/destination airport
mitted more than 160 Airbus air- • Facility designation
craft to the Link 2000+ Programme • Information about available
pioneer phase. Operator accep- air applications
tance for the pioneer phase is
planned to end during 2007. THE CONTROLLER PILOT DATA-LINK
COMMUNICATION (CPDLC)
Following the pioneer phase, the APPLICATION
Link 2000+ Programme is cur-
rently investigating introducing The CPDLC application provides
incentives for those aircraft that are direct pilot/controller communica-
Controller Pilot Data Link tion using data link between an
Communications/Aeronautical aircraft and the controlling ATC
Telecommunications Network centre. A voice readback is
(CPDLC/ATN) equipped and oper- required for any messages related
ate in Link 2000+ Programme air- to any changes of the aircraft
space. The intended follow-on trajectory.
from this incentivephase will be a
‘mandate’phase where all aircraft This application provides a set
operators flying in Link 2000+ of data link message elements
Programme airspace will be corresponding to existing Inter-
required to equip with CPDLC/ national Civil Aviation Organiza-
Current FANS1/A datalink services 2005-2011 Link2000+ Programme data link services(FANSB) ATN avionics, subject to certain tion (ICAO) phraseology.
conditions.
Functions provided by the CPDLC
Incentive and mandate phases will application are:
require an upgrade of existing • The ATC Communication
products to be compliant with the Management (ACM) Service
Eurocae standard ED 110B to • The ATC Clearance (ACL)
remove the requirement for voice Service
readback. • The ATC Microphone Check
(AMC) Service
Link 2000+
AIR NAVIGATION SERVICE PROVIDER
Programme
(ANSP) COMMITMENT
applications and
Maastricht centre (the pioneer ATC
services
centre) has been controlling flights
using CPDLC since 2005. Most of
THE CONTEXT MANAGEMENT the European ATC centres have
APPLICATION (CMA) committed themselves to the Link
2000+ and their deployments are
This application provides the Data proceeding to schedule. Other
Link Initiation Capability (DLIC) ANSPs are split into two groups,
service that is mandatory prior those able to achieve by 2008 and
to any CPDLC connection. This the others able to achieveby2011.
14
04TSAF
A Preliminary Eurocontrol Trial mode A improves the data rate
(PETAL), the Eurocontrol test of exchanges between aircraft and the
air/ground data link, a project at ground station (data rate multiplied
Airbus and the Maastricht Upper by ten, new modulation scheme,
Airspace Centre (UAC), and its new communication protocol).
follow-on PETAL II, also conduct-
ed until the end of 2001 at the Link 2000+
Maastricht UAC, demonstrated
Programme
that the transmission of digital data
via air/ground data link offers a phased
reliable alternative to voice com-
implementation
munications in relieving spectrum
and ATC congestion and improv-
ing safety in air transport. The Link 2000+ Programme will start
Maastricht UAC controls the upper with a pioneer phase whose objec-
airspace of Belgium, the Nether- tive is to gain operational experi-
lands, Luxembourg and part of ence on ATC data link use, with
Germany, which carries a lot of pioneer airlines and pioneer ATC
Europe’s air traffic. centres, to prepare for full deploy-
ment of ATC data link in Europe’s
The experience gained from the upper airspace. The product need-
PETAL projects was used for a ed for the Link 2000+ Programme
new project in Europe known pioneer phase requires a voice
as the Link 2000+ Programme, readback in accordance with
which provides air traffic European Organization for Civil
controllers and pilots with a second Aviation Equipment (Eurocae)
communication channel: An air/ standard ED-110A, which provides
ground data link, over an an interoperability requirements
Aeronautical Telecommunica- standard for the initial implemen-
tions Network/VHF Data Link tation of the Aeronautical Tele-
2007 Worldwide air traffic (ATN/VDL) Mode 2 infrastructure communications network (ATN),
data link services in the core area of Europe. which supports several Air Traffic
VDL mode 2 compared to VDL services.
ANSPs committed for 2008
Country ANSP
Germany DFS
Switzerland Skyguide
Italy ENAV
Ireland IAA
ANSPs committed for 2011
Country ANSP
Portugal NAV Portugal
France DSNA
UK UK NATS
Spain AENA
15
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
Future and benefit from the incentive
phase, and also be compliant with
Air Navigation
the Link 2000+ Programme man-
System B date. Airbus is closely cooperating
with Link 2000+ Programme man-
(FANS B)
agement to finalize incentives and
mandate conditions in the best
The FANS B product is Airbus interests of Airbus customers.
response to the Eurocontrol Link
2000+ Programme for utilization FANS B APPLICATIONS AND
of ATC data link in continental SERVICES
areas (high density airspaces with
radar surveillance) in the en-route The Airbus FANS B product offers,
phase, using the ATN air-ground at aircraft level, over ATN air-
communication network. As ATN ground communication network
is operational only in Europe, and through VDL Mode 2 sub-net-
FANS B is proposed only on A320 work, the data link applications and
Family aircraft for the time being. services (Context Management
Application, Controller Pilot Data-
The first FANS B package allows Link Communication application
airline participation in early imple- and ATC Communication Mana-
mentation phases of the Link gement, ATC Clearance, and
2000+ Programme - the ‘pioneer ATC Microphone Check services)
phase’. Airbus pioneer customers in accordance with Link 2000+
are Aeroflot-Russian International Programme specifications.
Airlines, Alitalia, Finnair, Niki,
Lufttransport Unternehmen, Royal FANS B ARCHITECTURE
Jordanian, and Tarom-Romanian
Air Transport. The FANS B architecture is the fol-
lowing:
For the following phases Airbus is • The airborne partwith the
aiming at a single FANS B evolu- ATSU (Air Traffic Service
tion enabling airlines to be eligible Unit), which is a modular
hosting platform that centralizes
all data communications (ATC
and AOC/Airline Operations
Communications) and manages
the dedicated Human Machine
Interface (HMI)
• The air/ground data link:
-ACARS (Aircraft
Communication Addressing
and Reporting System) over
VDL mode A/2, Satcom or
HFDL (HF Data Link) are
used to transmit AOC data.
Satcom and HFDL for AOC
are optional in the ATSU
architecture
-ATN over VDL mode 2 only,
is used to transmit ATC data to
the ground for communication
purposes
-The ground/ground data link:
Twotypes of network have to
be considered,the ACARS
network for AOC messages
and ATN network for ATC
messages
04TSAF
100
39
82
0
28
52
0
78
74
0
0
60
100
0
ANSP implementation plan
2005 2008 2011
16 17
04TSAF
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
Data link communications between
FANS Barchitecture
the aircraft and the airline opera-
tions centre optimize aircraft and
crew management, improve data
management like engine trend
monitoring or maintenance reports,
optimize spares management and
speed up repairs.
ON BOARD EQUIPMENT
The FANS B installation requires a
minimum standard of the follow-
ing equipment/installation:
• ATSU and Data link Control
and DisplayUnits (DCDU)
provision
• Two DCDUs that allow the
flight crew to read, and answer,
to CPDLC messages received
from the ground
• Twopushbuttons with
‘attention getters’on the glare
shield controlled by both Flight
Warning Computers (FWCs)
• One VHF Data Radio (VDR 3)
capable of VDL mode 2
• TwoMulti Purpose Control and
DisplayUnits (MCDUs)
• Two Flight Warning Computers
• The Central Fault Display
Air Traffic Services Unit - ATSU
Interface Unit (CFDIU)
Software Hardware
DCDU
HMI Comm. Comm. Operating EIS Management Applications Ressources Router System VDR
Power
MCDU Supply
Printer
SATCOM
Cockpit
interfaces
ATC Processor
ATN
module
FMS HFDR
CMC AOC Input/
ACARS
module Output
FWC
Mode S
Clock
...
...
Communications
Provisions
User systems Media
17
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
04TSAF
0
23
18
38
0
1 Two visual attention
getters 0
100
65
Two aural ATC
2 39
alerts 1
3 FWC information 2
about 49 3
abnormal sit0uations
100
39
Two DCDUs
4 4
5 ATC menu on each 5
MCDU 82
0
28
52
0
78
74
0
0
60
100
0
i n f o r m a t i o n
FANS A+is the well-known air/ground data link and navigation system used in low density/oceanic environments.
It is basic on all Airbus A330/A340 and available as an option on A320 Family aircraft.
North Atlantic Region benefits from data link. Pacific Sub–Region benefits from data link.
•In 2004,traffic levels exceeded pre–2001 levels •Reduced separations to 50/50nm and 30/30nm (trials)
•NAVCANADA has reduced communication costs to users •User preferred routes and re-route (trials) for all city pairs
by 50% in South Pacific
•55% of the fleet use either FMC (Flight Management •Weather deviations
Computer),WPR (Waypoint Position Reporting) or FANS A+ •Automatic position reporting
ADS–C for automatic position reporting •80% of the fleet in South Pacific use CPDLC
(Controller-Pilot Data-Link Communications) and ADS–C,
based on FANS A+,60% in the Central Pacific,and 30% on
average in the entire Pacific
18 19
04TSAF
THE FUTURE AIR NAVIGATION SYSTEM FANS B - AIR TRAFFIC COMMUNICATIONS ENHANCEMENT FOR THE A320 FAMILY
To ensure proper operation of FANS B aircraft in high-density continental data link airspaces
anoperator needs to ensure the following:
a) Acontract with a Data Service Provider,DSP (ARINC or SITA*) is signed 1
b) The aircraft is declared to the data link service provider
c) The aircraft and its FANS capability is declared to the ATC centres of the operated routes
2 d) The aircraft’s avionics are properly configured
e) Operational approval is obtained
4 *ARINC:Aeronautical Radio INC
SITA:Sté.Internationale de Telecommunications Aéronautiques
CONTACT DETAILS 5
Sophie de Cuendias
Design Manager
Upgrade Services
Airbus Customer Services
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 05 60
THE FANS B HUMAN MACHINE A configuration with two DCDUs Fax:+33 (0)5 62 11 08 47
Conclusion INTERFACE (HMI) was chosen in accordance with safe- sophie.de-cuendias@airbus.com
ty studies and human factors stud-
The preceding product, FANS A+, ies, because of a clear dissociation
has been in use for oceanic and of the ATC communication from
remote area operations for several other communications; absence of The FANS B product is the first Airbus The above benefits are thanks to
years (see information). The main interference with the previously answer to ATN based data link operations. improvements such as better task sharing
HMI principles, defined on the existing crew operational proce- Highly inspired by the FANS A/A+ between controllers.
A330/A340 and A320 Family dures; direct full time availability of package, FANS B integrates the same
FANS A+ installation, are also ATC clearance messages; and its interfaces and operational principles for The Link 2000+ Programme can only be
used on FANS B. location in the forward field of view denser airspaces and for the successful with the wide involvement of
near the MCDUs. characteristics of the ATN environment air navigation service providers,
The HMI equipment used in the (network architecture, technical communication service providers, airlines
cockpit for FANS B functions are: The ATC alerts consist of: acknowledgement timestamp, timers). and of course controllers and pilots. This
• Two DCDUs • An aural alert: is now under way – a contribution to safer,
FANS B enables aircrew to manage data on-time aircraft operations.
• The MCDU to access the ATC Aspecific sound named
link communications between the aircraft
message MENU ‘RING’(double brief ringing-
and the ground Air Traffic Services, as well It is anticipated that other regions will
• Electronic Centralized Aircraft phone-like alert)
as communications between the aircraft deploy ATN data link capabilities in their
Monitor (ECAM) pages and • Avisual alert:
and the AOC. environment. A strong international
alerts for FWC information Two flashing lighted push-
standardization effort, in which Airbus has
about abnormal situations button switches labelled ‘ATC
The availability of a second means of akey role, is being made to have
• Two push buttons with visual MSG’(one for CAPT, one for
communication reduces communication interoperable standards. In particular
attention getters, and the two F/O), located in the glare shield.
errors, aircrew and controller workload CPDLC is part of Federal Aviation
associated aural ATC alerts The flashing period is one
and fatigue and will thus contribute to Administration (FAA) Next Generation Air
• The printer second
higher safety levels - radio voice Transportation System (NGATS).
communications have a number of
drawbacks in today’s busy traffic Link 2000+ Programme and FANS B are
environment and pilots have to listen to key components of the Single European
each controller-initiated communication. Sky ATM (Air Traffic Management)
Research (SESAR) concept for future
Other benefits are expected with the entry European Air Traffic Management System.
into operations of the data link technology Any airlines interested in information about
in European airspaces such as an FANS B or in upgrading their aircraft to
increase of airspace capacity by: this standard are invited to contact Airbus
-3.4% with a data link equipage Customer Services Upgrade Services at
rate of 25%* upgrade.services@airbus.com or consult
-8% with a data link equipage the ‘getting to grips with Fans B in high-
rate of 50%* density continental areas part III’ brochure
-11% with a data link equipage distributed by Airbus.
rate of 75%*
*Figures given in the Eurocontrol website
19
FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES
Airline 3
Airline 3
Airline 4
Airline 4
FAIR is adding collaboration to the
existing communication means and
media, with the objective of identi-
fying key customer issues and
bringing to them the best solutions.
Benefiting from new web tech-
nologies, FAIR has been developed
Airline 1
in a two-step approach:
1. Establish web-based forums
Airline1
that allow the airlines and Airline 2
Airline2
Airbus to openly exchange
their experience and
expectations in specific
Airline 3
domains of support and
Airline3
services
Airline4
2. Establish joint airlines/Airbus
decision-making processes in Airline 4
each forum, in order to define
the required go-forward plans
The first FAIR forum Airbus has Other FAIR forums are being
developed is FAIR-ISP (In-Service developed. With the creation of
Problems). FAIR-ISP enhances other FAIR forums dedicated to
collaboration between the airlines various support and services, FAIR
and Airbus for the identification, will progressively become the
evaluation, prioritization and reso- global collaborative platform
lution of In-Service Problems (see between the airlines and Airbus
definitions next page). Customer Services.
21
04TSAF
FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES
Without FAIR
•Bilateral discussions →Bilateral discussions maintained
•Airbus decisions →Multilateral discussions added
→Joint decisions
FAIR: More forums are being developed
In addition to FAIR-ISP,two other forums are currently under development.
FAIR-OPS,aforum for the Flight Operations FAIR-A350 XWBis a forum that will be
domain,has received strong support from dedicated to the Airbus A350 XWB development.
airlines.The initial specification was worked It is aimed at further improving communication
upon in a workshop in March 2007 with flight between A350 XWB confirmed and potential
operations representatives from airlines already customers and the Airbus A350 XWB
active with FAIR-ISP. development teams.Tocomplement existing
The FAIR-OPS project was presented to the face-to-face A350 XWB progress reviews,the
airline community in the 15th Performance and forum will allow permanent exchanges.This will
Operations conference in April 2007. result in enhanced uniformity between the A350
The first version of the FAIR-OPS software will XWB design and airline community expectations
be reviewed with airlines in a workshop in the throughout the aircraft development phases,
fourth quarter of 2007 and deployment will start until EntryInto Service.
early in 2008. Deployment of FAIR-A350XWB is planned for
October 2007.
21
04TSAF
With FAIR
Initial experience i n f o r m a t i o n
from the FAIR-ISP After a one-year development with 19 airlines
and a one-year pilot phase with up to 42 airlines,
FAIR-ISP was deployed to the worldwide fleet in
on-line forum December 2006.It has already met with great
success among the 100 operators using the
service.
Increasing airlines and Airbus
collaboration on in-service
fleet issues
The size of the Airbus fleet in-service has dramaticallyincreased in recent years and a huge amount
of experience is accumulating from almost 5,000 in-service aircraft and their millions of flight hours.
This is raising questions for support and services:
• Howcan this huge and fast growing in-service experience be better shared for the benefit of all
airlines?
• How can Airbus better determine and prioritize key issues for the worldwide fleet?
• Howcan Airbus bring effective solutions to these key issues, which meet customers’expectations?
These are the main questions that have driven Airbus to launch a new service called FAIR,
standing for Forum with Airlines for Interactive Resolution.
Denis Tissié
Deputy Vice-President A330/A340 Programme
Airbus Customer Services
20
Roles and their fleet operations ensures that
items posted on the forum are of
responsibilities
interest to the other users and
remain fleet level issues.
Four different roles have been
defined among FAIR-ISP users. Writer/validator access to the
Each role has its privileges, making FAIR-ISP tool is controlled by the
the whole process totally clear and Airbus FAIR administrator.
easing participation and decisions
(seedefinitions). FAIR-ISP writers/validators have
reader/drafter rights. In addition to
THE READER/DRAFTER their reader/drafter rights, they are
responsible for posting their airline’s
This is the default role of any contributions on the forum. For this
FAIR-ISP user. purpose, they can consult, edit,
delete, or post all ‘Ready to post’
Reader/drafter access to the FAIR- drafts. A writer/validator can also
ISP tool is controlled by the airline directly create and post items with-
User Entity Administrator (UEA). out going through the draft process.
Each airline UEA can create an
unlimited number of FAIR-ISP THE SCREENING COMMITTEE
reader/drafter accounts. MEMBER
A FAIR-ISP reader/drafter can The Screening Committees are the
consult the forum and can create decision bodies of the FAIR-ISP
and save drafts of FAIR items. The process. They are aircraft family-
draft items are only visible to users specific (A300/A310, A320,
of the drafter’s airline. The items A330/A340) and consist of around
that can be drafted are: New In- 12 representatives selected from
Service Problems, comments on the writers/validators of participat-
In-Service Problems, replies to ing airlines.
comments or assessments of In-
Service Problems. Each Screening Committee gathers
regularly (every four to six weeks)
When a draft has been finalized through Webex conference calls, to
and is deemed ready for posting on review the ISP, define ISP closure
the forum, the reader/drafter can criteria, select and prioritize
flag it as ‘Ready to post’in the soft- MISPs, agree MISP resolution and
ware. The items in ‘Ready to post’ agree MISP closure. All Screening
status are then displayed to the Committee decisions are taken for
writer/validator (see following) of the benefit of the entire fleet. The
the airline. agenda and minutes are approved
by the airline co-chairmen (see
This draft process allows any following) and posted on the forum
maintenance or engineering spe- for everyone to consult.
cialist within the airline to prepare
the items for posting bytheir writ-
ers/validators.
THE WRITER/VALIDATOR
The number of writers/validators
is limited to twoper aircraft fami-
ly operated by the airline. They
have a management level and
therefore can act on behalf of their
airline. Limiting the number of
writers/validators to management
levels who have an overview of
23
04TSAF
FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES
Reader/drafter
Anyone who has access to
FAIR-ISP can create a draft of
contribution elements
Writer/validator
Two senior managers per
airline per operated aircraft
type can post contributing
elements on FAIR-ISP
A contribution
element
Acontribution element may be:
•An ISP
•Acomment to an ISP
•Areply to a comment
•An assessment of an ISP
In-Service Problem
ISP
An ISP is a recurring issue that
an airline is facing on its fleet
in-service and hasan impact on:
•operations
•maintenance costs
•aircraft availability
•passenger perception
•or on the environment
An ISP materializes with FAIR-ISP
into an item that an airline will
post on the online forum.
Major In-Service FAIR-ISP draft process
Problem
MISP
AMISP is an ISP thatis classified
as major because of significant
impact on:
•continued airworthiness
•and/or costs
•operational performance
•passenger perception
•or airframe image
Asubject is accepted as a MISP
by the FAIR-ISP Screening
Committee.
23
04TSAF
39
49
0
100
39
82 Phase 1: Identification,evaluation and prioritization of the ISP
0
28 d e f i n i t i o n s
52
0
78
74
0
0
60
100 Phase 2: Agreement and production of solutions to address the MISP
0
d e f i n i t i o n s Phase 3: Verification of solution effectiveness and MISP closure
The FAIR-ISP of nine successive steps, each cov-
ering one part of the In-Service
process
Problems identification, prioriti-
zation and resolution process. In
Asdescribed previously, FAIR-ISP each phase, the airlines and Airbus
is not just an on-line forum, can voice and share their opinions
it is also a tool for making deci- and their experience. Forum contri-
sions. The most important butions allowajoint airlines/Airbus
one to be made is to decide if an Screening Committee to make the
ISP that one airline has identified best decisions for the benefit of the
is a major fleet issue, a so called entire fleet.
Major In-Service Problem (MISP),
that needs to be resolved as a high Through enhanced transparency and
priority (seedefinitions). sharing of opinions, all phases con-
tribute to the following objectives:
For this purpose, the FAIR-ISP •Focus on the MISPs affecting
process is split into three major the fleet in-service,
collaboration phases, consisting •Agree resolution of these MISPs
22
Toraise a new ISP
Topost a new comment on the selected ISP Toexport the itemsthat are
displayed in the current view
Topost an assessment on the selected ISP
Tomodify anexisting draftISP,
adraftcomment/reply or adraft
assessment (function available
untilthe item isfinally posted by
avalidator).
Todelete anexisting draftISP,
adraftcomment/reply or adraft
assessment that the user no
longer wishes to post on
the forum.
Todisplay the item detailsor
summary
Announcements
provide general
Previewpane:
information on
Showsthe contents of the selected
FAIR-ISP. item (ISP,comment, reply,
Theseare postedby Toreplyto the selected comment Toreceive realtime email assessment, announcement)
the FAIR administrator. notificationof anynew input
being postedbyother userson
the selectedISP
The FAIR software is in continu- The Airbus flying fleet is also well
ous evolution to include functional represented through a very bal-
evolutions or ergonomic enhance- anced worldwide distribution of
ments as requested by the users. connected airlines. However, the
Users have praised the friendliness majority of airlines connected to
and simplicity of the FAIR soft- FAIR-ISP are mostly consulting
ware tool. Continuous improve- the forum and only part of them are
ment is ensured while performance actively posting.
is being monitored very closely.
FAIR-ISP status
FAIR-ISP is moving towards the
success expected thanks to airline
contributions. While still in a
ramp-up phase, nevertheless, air-
line contributions keep increasing
at a good pace (see information).
CONNECTION RAMP-UP
The number of airlines connected
since the official FAIR-ISP open-
ing in December 2006 has more
than doubled. This is evolving very
quickly: The 100th airline was
connected in May 2007.
25
04TSAF
FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES
The FAIR-ISP main page
Airlines’ contributions (May 2007)
•70 % of the Airbus in-service fleet
•100 operators of all aircraft families
•5,000 users in reader/drafter mode
•170 writer/validators
•160 In-Service Problems
•13 agreed as Major In-Service Problems
•2MISPs with solutions agreed
•45 ISPs closed,usually with a solution
25
04TSAF
6655
3399
4499
00
110000
3399
The Screening Committee process The FAIR software
8822 also prevents accumulation of a
00
backlog of open items in FAIR-ISP. FAIR has been designed by the air-
2288
At the end of the FAIR-ISP phase lines for the airlines. A panel of 19
5522
1, the inactive, general discussion airlines representing the fleet (geo-
or low priority items are screened graphical distribution, fleet and
and closed as required. type of operation) actively con- 00
tributed to the development and the
7788
7744 Any airline can apply for industrialization of the process and
00 Screening Committee member- tool. This led to the specification of
ship. A yearly renewal is planned aweb-based forum software, avail-
with a turnover of 25%. able on the AirbusWorld portal.
00 Candidates will be selected based
6600 on their contribution to the forum. The key drivers for software devel-
110000 opment were friendliness and
00
simplicity. Some of the main
THE SCREENING COMMITTEE appreciated features are:
AIRLINE CO-CHAIRMEN • All major functionssuch as
Raise, Comment, Assess, Edit,
There are two airline co-chairmen Display details, Display
for each Screening Committee, one summary, are accessible via
prime and one backup. simple buttons on the main
screen
The prime airline co-chairman co- • Customized views:Users have
chairs the Screening Committee access to predefined views and
with the Airbus co-chairman. can even define their own
There is always one airline co- custom view, based on their
chairman participating in the preferences (aircraft type, ATA
Screening Committee. During the chapter, etc)
meeting, the airline co-chairman • Notification system:Users are
can act as discussion facilitator to notified of new items matching
ensure that fleet interests are their preferences. FAIR users
considered rather than individual can adjust frequencyof
airlines interests. They can also notification and can also
mitigate or advocate the different subscribe to specific items of
standpoints of Screening Commit- particular interest to them, for
tee members to reach a consensus. which they will receive real
time notification
The airline co-chairmen contribute • Draft items:Users can draft and
also to the Screening Committee submit draft items for posting
agenda preparation. The airline by their fleet writers/validators
co-chairmen validate Screening • ‘Summary’and ‘Details’sheets:
Committee meeting minutes Users can open a one-page
i n f o r m a t i o n
before distribution to the FAIR- summary or a full description of
ISP community.Finally, the air- any item. They can print or save
line co-chairmen guarantee that them in PDF format on their
the FAIR-ISP rules and guide- own PC
lines are applied by all airlines • Assessment:Users can assess
and can intervene when users do an ISP severity by filling and
not comply with the FAIR Specific posting the impact assessment
Terms and Conditions (STC). form
• Votes:Users can voice their
The prime airline co-chairman is preferred proposed solution to a
replaced every year by the back- MISP by submitting their vote
up co-chairman. The back-up co- • Multi-criteria search:Users can
chairman is in turnreplaced by a query the FAIR-ISP database
new back-up, to be elected by the with an advanced search engine
Screening Committee. combining raw text and list of
values search
24
FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES
27
04TSAF
FAIR-ISP ON-LINE FORUM - INCREASING AIRLINES AND AIRBUS COLLABORATION ON IN-SERVICE FLEET ISSUES
Therefore, Airbus encourages con- Screening Committee decisions How to get access Once the STC has been signed,
nected users to contribute more, can be made better and faster. your airline UEA will be given
to FAIR-ISP
and in particular to voice their Airbus also invites all operators authorization to open FAIR-ISP to
opinion and share their experience that have not yet joined the FAIR- your organization. In case of
on existing FAIR ISPs, so that ISP community to request their FAIR-ISP is accessible on access problems, contact your
connection (see how to get access AirbusWorld. The pre-requisites UEA.
to FAIR later) and nominates their for access are:
writers/validators to post their con- 1. Access to AirbusWorld and STEP 2
tributions. 2. Signature of the FAIR Specific OBTAIN WRITER/VALIDATOR ACCESS
Terms & Conditions (STC).
100 Leasing companies are not yet able Writer/validator access is limited
91
to consult the FAIR-ISP forum, but The FAIR-ISP connection proce- to two senior managers per airline
90
80 this will come mid 2007. Airbus dure is a two-step procedure: per operated aircraft family and is
80 74 suppliers, who are key players in controlled by the Airbus FAIR
70 65 the MISP resolution process, also STEP 1 administrator. The contact details
64% do not have access to FAIR-ISP OBTAIN READER/DRAFTER ACCESS of your airline writers/validators
60 60%
51 58% yet, but this will be considered must be provided to your CSD for
55%
50 50% later, when the FAIR-ISP process Every airline can apply for an transmission to the Airbus FAIR CONTACT DETAILS
and tool are mature and robust. unlimited number of reader/drafter administrator. The Airbus FAIR
40 Denis Tissié
accounts managed by their own administrator will advise airline
Deputy Vice-President
30 Forum activity airline User Entity Administrator writers and their UEA as soon as A330/A340 Programme
20 (UEA). Contact your Airbus writer/validator connection is Airbus Customer Services
Customer Support Director (CSD) established, or if there are any Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 30
10 The number of posts in the forum to obtain a copy of the FAIR STC. connection problems. Fax:+33 (0)5 61 30 00 79
0 has grown together with the denis.tissie@airbus.com
or:
Dec 06 Jan 07 Feb 07 Mar 07 Apr 07 number of connected operators. At
FAIR administrator
end April 2007, 160 ISPs in total
fair.admin@airbus.com
A300/A310 A320 A330/A340 All Fleet coverage* were posted on the forum for the
Conclusion
(*) Fleet coverage:percentage of aircraftoperated three Airbus aircraft families:
byairlines connected to FAIR-ISP versustotal fleet in-service A300/A310, A320 and A330/A340.
Of the 160 ISPs, 13 were accepted
as MISPs by the Screening Since the official opening of the FAIR-ISP work together in a common on-line forum
Committees. forum in December 2006, things are to share fleet experience and issues,
progressing very quickly and very much in identify and prioritise problems, and define
the direction expected. One hundred and validate solutions. Airlines in
Two MISPs have even gone
operators are connected today and completely different regions of the world
through the solution selection
several additional ones are being added can therefore become aware of the
process (phase 2 of the FAIR-ISP
every month. experience of each other and share this
process described earlier). Among
common knowledge to the benefit of their
the proposed solutions, the airlines
The FAIR-ISP decision process is working planning and fleet operations. For Airbus,
have either voted for their pre-
as expected, with up to 13 MISPs opened the benefits arean increased awareness of
ferred one and/or rejected the
on the forum, 45 items closed (usually fleet operational issues, the ability to
others. Based on this input, the with a solution) and others being prioritise problems and define solutions
Screening Committee was able to discussed or monitored. with airlines and hence provide a better
select the final solutions to be and quicker service for customers.
developed to address the MISPs.
Feedback from the airlines using FAIR-ISP
is positive and they highlight numerous Not all airlines are currently connected to
45 items have been closed with benefits of using the process with the top FAIR-ISP and Airbus encourages all
Screening Committee approval. two being: airlines to connect to FAIR-ISP and
Most of them already had an exist- •Managing together with Airbus the list of contribute actively to identifying,
ing interim or final solution in top fleet issues and being able with evaluating, prioritising, and resolving the
place, documented byAirbus. Airbus to define the top priorities to be in-service problems that may impact their
addressed operations. FAIR-ISP is a tool defined by
Airbus strongly encourages opera- •Defining and delivering solutions that are airlines, for airlines, and will be
tors to participate actively in the validated, or even improved, by airlines increasingly successful with open, regular
FAIR-ISP discussion phases. This through FAIR-ISP and constructive dialogue - to the benefit
will allow building robust files of all using it. Airbus looks forwardto
quickly to speed and ease The FAIR-ISP process provides a new and building this working-together forum with
innovative means for airlines and Airbus to customers. Screening Committee decisions for
the benefit of the entire fleet.
27
04TSAF
65
39
49
0
100
39
82
0
28
52
0
78
74
0
0
60
100
0
140
11
120 7 14
6
13
100 17
3
19 80
3
18
60 3 97
7 9
91
5 12 7 80
40 2 64
5
9 45 49
8 38 34 38 20 3 29
7 29 18 21
11 6 6 7 7 9 9 9 9 9 13
0
26
M0
2
a0 r6 A p r M a y J u n J u l A u g S e p O c t N o v D e c a J0
2
n0
7
F e b M a r A p r
FAIR-ISP connected airlines
FAIR-ISP new,open and closed items
Closeditems Open ISPs
New items Open MISPs
THE FIRST AND THE LAST OF THE A300/A310 FAMILY
August 1972
First A300B roll-out of the assembly hall in Toulouse
September 1972 saw the official ceremony of the debut of a new ‘star’
in the aircraft world - the Airbus A300B, the first twin-aisle twin
engined aircraft designed for short and medium range operations.
The aircraft offered many advantages over comparable aircraft of the
day,such as being quieter and more fuel efficient,having nearly dou-
ble the passenger capacity and the ability to interline standard freight
containersbetween long-haul and short-haul flights.These advantages
were recognized by the industry and led to steady sales and a number
of variants to meet market needs.The first aircraft were the B2 short-
range and the B4 medium-range.These were followed by the A310 and
the A300-600,plus a number of variants of these aircraft.
Early passenger aircraft have
taken on a second lease of life by
being converted into freighters
and the capability of the aircraft
as a freighter is such that a large
number of new-build freighters
have been delivered during the
latter part of production. Perhaps
the most notable variant is the
A300 SuperTransporter, known as the ‘Beluga’that transports Airbus parts from site to site and is also used in
other freight activities such as flying outsize paintings from France to Japan.
Atotal of 822 A300/A310 Family aircraft were built and currently almost 90 organizations either operate or
own family aircraft. The service life of the A300/A310 Family is expected to extend to close to mid-
century, giving a life of over 70 years from roll-out to final retirement.
Naturally, Airbus is sad to see production of its first ‘star’cease, but this is a normal evolution and
aircraft from the family will still be in service for decades to come. Therefore, Airbus energies are
now focused on providing a level of support, service and customer satisfaction at least equal to that
of in-production Airbus aircraft. Support will be ensured to the aircraft family’s
operators until its end of life and then, finally, to ensure the environmentally friendly break-up
of retired aircraft.
04TSAF
27 March 2007
...and roll-out of the last of the Family.
28
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
SPARES,SUPPLIERS & facilitate communication. It inc- A300/A310 FAMILY TECHNICAL
WARRANTY SYMPOSIUM luded some 100 presentations SYMPOSIUM
BANGKOK,THAILAND spread in 12 different sessions TOULOUSE,FRANCE
12-14 MARCH 2007 covering the whole scope of 05-09 NOVEMBER 2007
For the fourth time the event Flight Operations activities Airbus Technical Symposiums
linking spares, supplier and (Operations, Performance, e-doc, are held for each Airbus pro-
warranty services together EFB, all aircraft types issues, gramme every two years with
generated an excellent mix of economics, services…). the target audience of airline
participants from customers The airline participants unani- engineering and maintenance
(53 participants) and suppliers mously mentioned it was a real managers. The next A300/A310
(48 participants) and provided success: ‘This type of confer- event will focus on current
an ideal platform to build on ence is absolutelyessential’. technical and maintenance sub-
existing relationships and fur- jects as well as general customer
ther discuss regional specifici- A320 FAMILYSYMPOSIUM support processes. There will be
ties and service strategies. BANGKOK,THAILAND a particular focus on the assur-
Airbus started by presenting the 07-11 MAY 2007 ance of long-term support of the
Customer Services portfolio of Customers supported Airbus fleet with consideration that the
modular support and services aspirations expressed at the last production aircraft will
‘Air+ by Airbus’and underlined the symposium, consisting of con- have been delivered during the
continuing efforts to improve, solidating the high level of summer of 2007.
based on market and customer operational reliability, enhanc-
feedback from the Customer ing Airbus support and services TECHNICAL DATA SUPPORT AND
Satisfaction Improvement Pro- and maximizing their aircraft SERVICES SYMPOSIUM
gramme, and spoke about the availability. TOULOUSE,FRANCE
‘FIRST’ programme, preparing 12-14 NOVEMBER 2007
the next 10 years’ vision. Then This fourth Technical Data
Airbus presented the latest news Symposium will provide a
concerning spares, supplier and unique opportunity for airline
warranty services. technical data managers, main-
tenance engineers and informa-
15TH PERFORMANCE AND OPER- tion technology specialists to
ATIONS CONFERENCE learn about the latest status of
PUERTO-VALLARTA,MEXICO our technical data products.
23-27 APRIL 2007 Separate, but integrated product
The 15th Performance & Oper- demonstrations and sideshows,
ations Conference representing to complement the main ses-
the greatest forum for Airbus’ sions, will be available through-
Flight Operations Support & out to allow active participation
Services activities. Attended by and an exchange of views.
181 participants from 73 airlines, Advance notification will be
it provided flight crews, opera- made in the near future via our
tions specialists and performance communication channels and
engineers with a unique opportu- invitations will be sent in the
nity to constructively exchange coming months.
views and information and to
04TSAF
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Thorsten Eckhoff
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3463
CHINA
Customer support centres
Peter Tiarks
Training centres
Senior Director Customer Support Spares centres / Regional warehouses
Tel: +86 10 804 86161 Ext 5040
Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63
RCSM location Country RCSM location Country
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORTADMINISTRATION
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates Louisville United States of America
Jean-Philippe Guillon Algiers Algeria Luanda Angola
Director Almaty Kazakhstan Luton United Kingdom
Resident Customer Support Administration Al-Manamah Bahrain Macau S.A.R. China
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02 Amman Jordan Madrid Spain
Amsterdam Netherlands Manchester United Kingdom
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64
Athens Greece Manila Philippines
Auckland New Zealand Mauritius Mauritius
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Baku Azerbaijan Memphis United States of America
Airbus has its main spares centre in Hamburg, Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei Mexico City Mexico
and regional warehouses in Frankfurt, Bangalore India Miami United States of America
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Bangkok Thailand Milan Italy
Barcelona Spain Minneapolis United States of America
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Beijing China Montreal Canada
Beirut Lebanon Moscow Russia
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Berlin Germany Mumbai India
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Brussels Belgium Nanchang China
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Bucuresti Romania Nanjing China
Buenos Aires Argentina New York United States of America support.airtac@airbus.com
Cairo Egypt Newcastle Australia
Caracas Venezuela Ningbo China
Spares AOGs in North America should be
Casablanca Morocco Noumea New Caledonia addressed to:
Changchun China Palma de Mallorca Spain
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Charlotte United States of America Paris France
Fax: +1 (703) 729 4373 Chengdu China Paro Bhutan
Cologne Germany Phoenix United States of America
Spares AOGs outside North America Colombo Sri Lanka Pittsburgh United States of America
should be addressed to: Columbus United States of America Prague Czech Republic
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 4001 Copenhagen Denmark Quito Ecuador
Damascus Syria Rome Italy
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 4011
Delhi India Sana’a Yemen
aog.spares@airbus.com Denver United States of America San Francisco United States of America
Detroit United States of America San Salvador El Salvador
Spares related HMV issues outside Dhaka Bangladesh Santiago Chile
North America should be addressed to: Doha Qatar Sao Paulo Brazil
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 4003 Dubai United Arab Emirates Seoul South Korea
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 4013 Dublin Ireland Shanghai China
Dusseldorf Germany Sharjah United Arab Emirates
hmv.spares@airbus.com
Fort Lauderdale United States of America Shenyang China
Frankfurt Germany Shenzhen China
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France
Guangzhou China Singapore Singapore
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33
Haikou China Sydney Australia
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Hangzhou China Taipei Taiwan
Hanoi Vietnam Tashkent Uzbekistan
Airbus Maintenance Training Centre Hamburg, Helsinki Finland Tehran Iran
Germany Hong Kong S.A.R. China Tel Aviv Israel
Tel: +49 40 743 88288 Indianapolis United States of America Tokyo Japan
Fax: +49 40 743 88588 Istanbul Turkey Toluca Mexico
Jakarta Indonesia Toulouse France
Johannesburg South Africa Tripoli Libya
Airbus Training subsidiaries Karachi Pakistan Tulsa United States of America
Miami, USA - Florida Kita-Kyushu Japan Tunis Tunisia
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Varna Bulgaria
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Kuwait City Kuwait Vienna Austria
Lanzhou China Washington United States of America
Beijing, China Larnaca Cyprus Wuhan China
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Lisbon Portugal Xi'an China
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 London United Kingdom Zurich Switzerland
29
