45#TSAF
20
45#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#54
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD Telemetry Centre 04
Design: Daren BIRCHALL
Cover: Non-Destructive Testing
Photo by: Sylvain BONNIOL
Greener solutions: cleaner
Printer: Amadio 12
chemicals with MPSP
Authorisation for reprinting FAST magazine
articles should be requested from the editor
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73 Non-DestructiveTesting 18
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
FAST magazine is available on internet
www.airbus.com/support/publications
and on tablets Structure Health Monitoring 22
ISSN 1293-5476
Importance of reporting
30
events from the field
© AIRBUS 2014
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of A320 Family noise reduction 36
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in FAST from the past 42
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be contacted
to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
We’ve got it covered 43
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350 XWB, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Where you see these icons,
Photo copyright Airbus videos or slide shows are available
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Flight on the iPad & Android app versions
Test Photo Lab, EADS Corporate Heritage, Master Films, EXM company, Sylvain Bonniol, of FAST magazine.
Philippe Masclet, Hervé Gousse, Axel Dreyer, Frédéric Lancelot, Shutterstock, Getty Images
2255##TTSSAAFF
2
200
Your Airbus technical magazine is now on tablet
The articles in this magazine appear in 2014 QTR 2 and QTR 3
iOS (iPad) & Android
Hamburg
Bremen
Filton
Saint-Nazaire
Saint-Genis
STMJ
Toulouse
SPTEMCAH Martigues
Seville
45#TSAF
40
45#TSAF
50
Telemetry Centre
Telemetry
Centre
Article by (left to right):
‘Mission control’
Gilles STUDER Jean-François MERYET David SIMON Jean-Marc WATTECANT
Test Analysis Telemetry Head of Flight Mechanics Head of Data Processing
for flight testing
Specialist Officer & Telemetry Flight and Integration Test Centre
AIRBUS AIRBUS AIRBUS AIRBUS
gilles.studer@airbus.com jean-francois.meryet@airbus.com david.simon@airbus.com jean-marc.wattecant@airbus.com
With no windows and matt black sound-proofed walls, the environment
of the Telemetry Centre has been designed to minimise the stress
of carrying out work that requires intense concentration over extended
periods of time.
Often likened to a mini NASA control room, the centre is lined with large
screens that offer audio and high definition video, and each work station
is full of monitors and bespoke computer equipment.
As aircraft become increasingly complex, and with
customers expecting more mature aircraft in shorter Airbus’ master Telemetry Centre is located at Toulouse (France).
It comprises three telemetry rooms capable of simultaneously following
development times, the need to optimise flight test cycles
three separate test flights.
becomes critical. The Telemetry Centre is a cornerstone
Airbus sites at Filton (UK), Bremen and Hamburg (both in Germany) are also The size and the shape
of Airbus’ flight testing process and is a key element to equipped with a telemetry room which can be connected to the Toulouse master of each circular area
centre. Toulouse can also be in inter-connexion with the Airbus Defence & Space depends on the aircraft’s
ensure the safety and efficiency of our flight tests. altitude and the local relief.
Telemetry Centre in Seville (Spain).
Data is transmitted in real-time to these telemetry rooms providing access
for more specialists. This immediacy improves the global data analysis
as specialists are able to hear the pilots’ commentary and see them
Foreword by
in the cockpit via the live flight video transmitted from the aircraft.
Fernando ALONSO
Head of Flight and Integration Tests Systems are checked for performance as specified, and if needed
requests can be made to the flight crew to repeat a test, or carry out
a certain action.
Thanks to the high volume of quality data available through telemetry, Design Office
specialists can remain on ground following the tests performed by the flight crews. The most crucial aspect of being able to monitor flights live is that
the engineers can better understand the context of each test result.
Airbus’ master Telemetry Centre located in Toulouse (France) has the capacity to follow
For example, they can appreciate how local weather conditions,
three different flight tests simultaneously. As many specialists are located throughout
may be affecting the flight. As well as knowing what is happening inside
Airbus’ sites in Europe, annex telemetry rooms have been deployed and are able to
the aircraft, they can also see what’s going on outside via cameras
view and analyse flight test data in a “live” transmission.
mounted on the aircraft’s exterior.
The multiplication of specialists viewing data permits a quicker analysis and real-time
corrective measures or adjustments.
The progressively rapid transmission of data and its analysis, allows continuous
interaction between the Telemetry Centre conductor and the test pilots.
• Test flights are conducted in six zones of approximately 500 km in diameter Annex telemetry rooms
The communication is so fluid that it’s easy to forget that they’re not still up there
allow correspondance with
in the aircraft! • Six antennas cover the flight test area in the west and south part of France
specialists in the engineering
The Telemetry Centre is definitely a safer and more efficient way to test our aircraft. • Three separate aircraft can be tracked simultaneously disciplines of each Airbus site:
• The optical range is more than 350 km at 40,000 ft Filton - ATA chapters 28, 32 & 47
Hamburg - mainly ATA 21
• Antennas are linked and controlled from the Telemetry Centre in Toulouse
Bremen - mainly ATA 27-50
• Ethernet IP data transfers 10 Mbits/sec from antenna stations See wikipedia.org
to the Telemetry Centre for ATA* chapters list
• Transmission for useful data from the aircraft is > 5 Mbits/sec
* Air Transport Association
45#TSAF
60
45#TSAF
70
Telemetry Centre Telemetry Centre
The This highly sophisticated installation has been set up with two main objectives:
• Enhancing the safety of test flights by minimizing the crew on-board
Telemetry
the aircraft while maximizing the number of analysts on the ground.
• Increasing efficiency of the flight test campaign by providing real-time analysis
Centre, support from the ground which allows optimising the contents of the flight
and reducing the number of flights.
a great Since its creation, Airbus’ Telemetry Centre has seen huge progress. Even if the
mission hasn’t changed, the level of aircraft support has grown and technical analysis
strategic has been improved. The Telemetry Centre was initially dedicated to flight testers.
Now, thanks to improvements in the tools and mind-set evolution, the centre has
become a privileged place where people coming from different activities share their
choice
questions and solutions.
Different tools
In order to fully understand all on-board messages and events, the telemetry room
conductors use tools which enable the same vision as the airborne flight test
engineers, with the difference that they receive more detailed results.
In 2012, an update in the Telemetry Centre’s IT improved the analysis efficiency.
With new data management and advanced technologies, telemetry is now more
reactive and flexible, adapting its analysis during test flights.
Aircraft and telemetry: continuous interactions
The telemetry conductor is in continuous communication with the airborne flight test
engineer, sharing instructions and advice. The conductor is also the focal point,
sharing information with specialists.
AIRBORNE
Flight test engineer
Discussion
Telemetry took
its full dimension
GROUND BASED
Telemetry conductor during the A380’s
maiden flight.
Flight analysis
Test specialists Test specialists
Aircraft physics integration Systems integration
Data sending
Design Office Programme Flight test engineer
Slide the timeline 2006 2009
Third telemetry room For the A400M
installed at Toulouse, France the first Seville ground based telemetry
1990 The “S” band in COFDM mode was initiated for the A340-600 programme significantly
followed by Toulouse
1987 improving the signal’s fidelity, while increasing the transmission from 1Mbits/sec to 5.4 Mbits/sec.
Second telemetry 2004 2007
First telemetry room room at Toulouse, Coded Orthogonal Frequency Division Multiplexing (COFDM) Telemetry rooms installed at
installed at Toulouse, France France is a modulation scheme that divides a single digital signal across multiple signal carriers simultaneously. Telemetry room First interoperation Hamburg, Germany
for the A320 Signals are sent at right angles to each other (hence, orthogonal) overcoming multipath effects. installed at Seville, Spain between Toulouse Bremen, Germany
and Seville Filton, UK
EIS (Entry-Into-Service) EIS EIS EIS EIS EIS
1987 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
A320 A340 A330 A380 A400M A350 XWB
Frequency
L Band: 1 to 2 GHz S Band: 2 to 4 GHz C Band: 4 to 8 GHz
(5.091 to
5.250 GHz
1986 - 1990 1990 - 1996 1996 - 2004 2005 - 2014
for aeronautical
• Complex architecture • Acquisition: one PCM • Graphic application • Data Ethernet packets telemetry)
• Many machines for message • Semi-closed telemetry world • Multi-window • Bandwidth: 5 to 10 Mbits/sec
acquisition • Possibility of following two aircraft • Multi-application • Multiple parameter lists selectable from the ground
• One machine to monitor loads • Open telemetry world • Uplink (data trasmission to the aircraft)
• No graphic station • Real-time and deferred-time transmission available • Data compression
• Acquisition: only one PCM • COFDM • Possibility of following three aircraft (Pulse Code Modulation)
• Closed telemetry world
• Possibility of following one aircraft
45#TSAF
80
45#TSAF
90
Telemetry Centre Telemetry Centre
The 12
Telemetry Centre supports the aircraft
flight test
The Telemetry Centre surveys the safety of the aircraft and crew, giving warnings
during flight regarding structure, loads and systems’ events.
groups
In real-time, the telemetry analyses flight physics and crucial systems such as
electrics, hydraulics, braking, pressurisation, de-icing, etc.
Consequently, the main role of the Telemetry Centre is to help the crew, and specifically
• Performance
the flight engineer, validating data and manoeuvres during the flight. Telemetry has
now become mandatory for flights such as flutter testing or load calibration.
• Aerodynamics
Most handling qualities and performance flights are also performed with telemetry’s
support during the entire development phase and up to aircraft certification.
• Engine
• Handling qualities Real-time and deferred analysis
• Flight control The Telemetry Centre is able to analyse data sent by the aircraft both in real-time
and in slightly deferred time.
• Braking
The analysis team of specialists study real-time transmissions from the aircraft on
• Electricity generic or ATA chapter specific screens. Telemetry equipment is pre-configured
based on the results of Functional Integrated Benches and simulators (mainly for
• Cabin systems parts) but also on input coming from computations (finite element stress
analysis for loads, computational fluid dynamics for aerodynamics, etc.).
• Flutter
The equipment then interprets flight test behaviour and is able to send a warning
to the aircraft when the situation becomes critical or dangerous.
• Load
These telemetry tools also propose real-time automatic monitoring which can warn
• Autopilot
the specialist in case of an unexpected event.
• Fuel Deferred computation allows a more detailed analysis which is then compared with
previous models and sent to the Design Office, aircraft programme, other crew
and test specialists after the flight test in order to get a global overview of the results.
Evolution of telemetry
As the safety and performance of aircraft improves, the need for tests increases.
Fortunately technological improvements also mean increased data flow of a higher fidelity and faster calculation of complex signals.
45#TSAF
01
Telemetry Centre
From test benches to telemetry data
The Telemetry Centre is the concretisation of months of teamwork preparing for the
flight test campaign. Activity fields such as design, structure and systems meet to
assess the aircraft’s behaviour in real conditions, and work on the same operational
subject. This way of working allows immediate sharing of information, enabling them
to define together the conclusions of preliminary results.
The on-ground telemetry conductor and the airborne flight test engineer are in
communication throughout the entire test flight. Telemetry specialists are in charge
of preparing analysis tools to face any event during the flight. They assess the overall
aircraft behaviour to ensure that all requirements are met in terms of performance
Test activities throughout an aircraft’s development cycle
and general handling.
End
Definition Begin Entry development
Order of basic End Specification Definition Final Into phase
released aircraft of concept phase phase Assembly Power 1st Type Service for basic
for project concept phase complete complete Line On flight validation (EIS) aircraft
Functional Integration Benches , simulators, etc. Telemetry Centre
Feasibility Concept Definition Development Post EIS
Strategy and programmes
Development flight tests
Test means
Test instrumentation
Test analysis
Production flight tests
Telemetry support brings Number of parameters 0 500 1000 1500 2000
advantages in terms Performance
The future of the Telemetry Centre
of planning and quality
Aerodynamics
A new European regulation regarding frequencies’ transmission will allow the use
Certifying an aircraft is an activity that
of a new wave band. This will open the way to increased telemetry capacities,
has become increasingly complex,
Engine allowing more parameters to be registered in real-time.
requiring testing to be more efficient.
Thanks to real-time test validation, Airbus Today, telemetry services are limited to France and Spain due to antenna coverage.
is able to certify its aircraft on schedule Handling Qualities We hope that one day, we will have the opportunity to analyse flight tests around
and thus respect commitments to deliver the world.
on time. Flight Control
Moreover, the real-time interactions
between the aircraft and the Telemetry Braking
Centre enable the optimization of the
aircraft during flight tests, resulting in Electricity
high-performance aircraft.
CONCLUSION
As an example (see right) the data flow Cabin
necessary for airworthiness certification
The Airbus Telemetry Centre receives data transmitted from aircraft during flight tests. This information can be
for the A380 would have taken much Flutter
studied in real-time from the safety of the ground or deferred for in-depth analysis.
longer were it not for improved
technology in telemetry data Flight tests can be followed in telemetry rooms at Filton, Hamburg and Bremen by specialists in engineering
Load
transmission. disciplines, improving the efficiency of test flights and facilitating the optimization of an aircraft’s performance
and safety.
Telemetry data transmission for the Autopilot A340-600
A340-600 was at 0.8 Mbits/sec, theoretical data flow The speed and accuracy of the transmitted and calculated data improves as technological advances in Airbus
of 2,400 parameters (max)
as opposed to the 5 Mbits/sec Fuel aircraft require more complex testing while respecting development and delivery times.
available for the A380.
A380
Generic theoretical data flow
of 8,000 parameters
45#TSAF
11
45#TSAF
21
45#TSAF
31
Cleaner chemicals with MPSP
Greener
IARC
REACH
RoHS
POPs
E U R A T O M
solutions
ECHA
C M R
ODS
OSPAR
Cleaner chemicals As regulations on the use of chemicals in the
These names are not the last trendy rock bands but a short list of laws,
aeronautical industry become increasingly
with Multi-Programme international agreements and authorities, linked to the regulation of hazardous
stringent, Airbus faces an interesting challenge. chemical substances to protect human health and the environment.
Substance Projects
The first health and safety laws in western countries to restrict the use of certain
On the one hand, regulations that are intended
chemicals were enacted in the second half of the 20th century.
to protect the environment and health of users, Ever since, regulations have become progressively more stringent covering
an ever growing list of substances.
align perfectly with Airbus’ commitment to offer
Regulations, such as REACH provide a legislative framework based on the
cleaner and safer aircraft.
precautionary principle and it is the producer’s responsibility for assessing
and managing the risks posed by chemicals and providing appropriate safety
On the other, many of these regulations concern
information to their users.
substances that provide the most efficient
Moreover, regulations are imposed at the source of production to prevent
technical solutions currently known. dissemination and limit exceptions.
It is important to note that the new regulations consider the use of substances
Airbus’ challenge is to find new solutions
throughout the entire production process.
that adhere to upcoming regulations, without
Impact on the aeronautical sector
compromising high performance and product
quality. Apart from regulatory obligations (registration or declaration of chemical use),
the main impact on the industry is the disappearance of raw materials used
to manufacture or maintain the final products.
Among the many aircraft components subject to obsolescence due to limitations
in the use of chemicals are:
• Paints
• Sealants
• Flame-retardants
• Batteries
• Electrical devices
• Extinguishers
Article by • Hydraulic fluids
Nicolas LOURDAUX (left)
The challenge is permanent, as regulations evolve and the visibility of substances that
Multi-Programme Substance Projects
may be banned in the future is poor.
AIRBUS
Moreover, despite our manufacturing business being global, we have to cope with
nicolas.lourdaux@airbus.com
different levels of regulation from a local law enforcement to international agreements
that are diversely implemented.
Rodolphe RIVIERE (right)
Airbus Process Technology Leader
for Surface Preparation and Painting
CMR: Contact MicroRadiography &
Industrial Domain Leader ECHA: European Chemicals Agency
for Multi-Programme Substance Projects EURATOM: European Atomic Energy Community
AIRBUS IARC: International Agency for Research on Cancer
rodolphe.riviere@airbus.com
ODS: Ozone Depleting Substances
OSPAR: Oslo and Paris Commission
POPs: Persistent Organic Pollutant
REACH: Registration, Evaluation and Authorization of CHemicals
YRASSOLG
Airbus has created a committee dedicated to Multi-Programme Substance Projects (MPSP)
in order to analyse the reports of upcoming regulations from the Environmental Affairs
department.
The committee governs the portfolio of substances impacted by new regulations
and steers the process to find new manufacturing processes with substitute chemicals.
A transversal management
The MPSP committee comprises a cross-functional management, grouping representatives
from all aircraft programmes, engineering, manufacturing, procurement, health and safety
departments, as well as the Environmental Affairs department.
The MPSP committee ensures:
• An improved visibility of upcoming changes to evaluate the impact well in advance
• Common priorities to minimize the impact on daily business
• A common strategy
• A common work process
• The sharing of best practices
• The mitigation of obsolescence
45#TSAF
41
45#TSAF
51
Cleaner chemicals with MPSP Cleaner chemicals with MPSP
An end-to-end process
Facing this challenge, Airbus has put in place an end-to-end process: from the analysis of the regulation to the final replacement
of chemical products on the aircraft or at the manufacturing/maintenance facilities.
End-to-end process management
Survey Keystone materials for the aeronautical industry such as aluminium alloys, require
the special care in terms of protection against corrosion.
regulations The main steps are: degreasing, pickling, chemical conversion or anodic oxidation,
followed by the application of structural paint loaded with corrosion inhibitors.
To complete these steps, the aviation industry still uses potentially harmful substances,
such as trichloroethylene, borax, chromic acid, zinc, barium and strontium chromates;
and this only concerns component protection. The treated parts are then assembled
to form subassemblies and in the end exterior paints will be applied. These assembly
operations involve amongst others: cadmium plated or chromate fasteners, themselves
Identify the protected by sealants or chromate paints.
chemical
A priority-based work plan
Considering the visibility given by the legislators about substances to be banned (3-4
years) and the time needed to qualify new solutions (can be 5 years or more), informed
analysis of the regulations and accurate prioritizing of the work plan is necessary.
Examples of topics which remain high on the agenda:
List the impacted
qualified products • Chromates: anodization, passivation, plating and paints (REACH)
• Cadmium: corrosion protection by plating (REACH)
• Halon: fire extinguishers (ODS)
• Phthalates: plastics (REACH)
• Short-chained chlorinated paraffins: fire retardants, plasticisers (POP)
• Lead: electronics card soldering, batteries (RoHS)
Set up
a project
Find technical
solutions
to qualify them
Manage the impact
of the new solutions
Implement
the new solution
Chemical regulation is not a temporary burden but an ongoing
opportunity to invent cleaner and safer manufacturing techniques.
Airbus has decided to embrace this challenge by streamlining the way
in which upcoming regulation is integrated into our daily business.
It has put in place an end-to-end process management committee
to treat Multi-Programme Substance Projects (MPSP).
The involvement of all parties is key to ensure this runs smoothly and
perpetuates. Issues are now identified, impacts are known and mitigation
plans are in place to ensure the smooth continuity of deliveries.
The aim of Airbus and our customers to minimize our environmental
impact is perfectly in line with the spirit of chemical regulation.
We have to, and will, find the best solution.
45#TSAF
61
45#TSAF
71
Cleaner chemicals with MPSP Cleaner chemicals with MPSP
Looking into future
paint regulations
The health and safety of Airbus personnel and the environmental impact
of the production process is of paramount importance, and the increasing
regulations in Europe encouraged Airbus towards a major overhaul of its
industrial processes. In 2005, a first step towards a greener future was taken.
For the first time we treated aircraft parts with hexavalent-chromium-free acid pickling.
This single change meant a lengthy work programme for our engineering offices and
innovation teams. Once the theory proven in laboratories, the introduction of new
facilities in factories is made progressively, beginning with the small size plants then
up-scaling to the bigger ones. There, the industrial engineering teams (manufacturing
and engineering) had to prepare the facilities to receive these new surface treatment
baths, adapt the key process parameters, the rinsing stations and review the quality
monitoring plan.
Chromic Acid Anodizing (CAA) is under replacement by Tartaric Sulphuric Acid Anodising
(TSA). This process which forms an oxide layer on parts provides corrosion protection
and is the interface between the metal and the paint coating. Perfect compatibility
between these two elements is paramount. However the standard paint in some of our
plants and in our supply chain has for long been the well-known PAC33, not compatible
with the oxide layer formed by TSA. It was also therefore necessary to qualify and
introduce new paints showing affinity with this new substrate. Furthermore, taking into
account European regulations related to Volatile Organic Compounds (VOC) - precursors
of greenhouse gas - these new paints must contain the least possible solvent.
This particularity gives them a different behaviour during their application and drying,
thus resulting in the need to invest in humidity control and new application equipment.
In assembly centres too, these new paints are emerging and with them the need to
further improve our processes for the surface preparation. We continuously develop,
in partnership with DÜRR ECOCLEAN, an innovative process combining steam
and high speed air, negating the need for a chemical additive.
We are thus able, for the first time, to completely clean without producing VOCs,
without any harmful chemicals and without leaving residues that disrupt the application
of new and more demanding paints. This new process promises opportunities in
terms of ergonomics, cycle time and automation. Indeed, paint booths, choice of
certain fasteners, their installation process, cleaning processes in assembly and the
final painting of Centre Wing Boxes manufactured in Airbus’ facility at Nantes (France)
are being adapted. CONCLUSION
The advantages are all now well-known and appreciated at this plant and were shared
within the Manufacturing/Engineering community to other plants.
Beyond the substantial ecological gain already provided by the introduction of the first
“chromate free” or “low VOC” solutions, the implementation of these new processes
has allowed a production overhaul and is part of our constant search for improvement.
With lessons learnt from these current projects, we are reaching a significant milestone:
chromate-free structural primer and touch-up implementation. As yet, no substitute
has shown a sufficient maturity to fulfil aircraft certification standards, the future
European regulations and our production requirements. Airbus is actively cooperating
with research laboratories and suppliers to make them an industrial reality as soon
as possible.
45#TSAF
81
45#TSAF
91
Non-Destructive Testing
Non-Destructive
NDT in aircraft manufacturing The following examples of main NDT
methods were performed at TESTIA,
a certified NDT examination and testing
NDT is a quality step used at key stages to establish whether the component
Testing organisation in the Airbus Group.
is fit to advance to the next manufacturing operation. By not continuing to add
There’s more to it man-hours and production cost to a defective component, significant time The tests were carried out by
and money is saved. David CEYRAT
than meets the eye
Training - TESTIA
Using knowledge from fatigue tests and data modelling, Airbus can calculate
and
the in-service life of a component. By introducing NDT inspections well in advance,
Fernando SANTOS
we can avoid large repairs, optimise the design and in many cases, reduce
Head of Engineering - TESTIA
the weight of components.
For more information, please contact
Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) Jean-Claude RISPAL
Training Manager - TESTIA
is used to confirm the integrity of a material
jean-claude.rispal@testia.com
without causing any damage
Patrick METAYER
to the component. Head of Airbus Non-Destructive Testing - AIRBUS
patrick.metayer@airbus.com
NDT tools and processes allow the user to:
• Detect defects that may occur
during the manufacturing process,
• Examine parts for defects during maintenance,
• Assess the severity of damage
following an impact.
Techniques for both metallic and composite materials
may be used depending on the nature and depth
of the indication:
Surface - magnetics, dye penetrants and eddy currents
1. Ultrasonic 2. Eddy current 3. Radiography
Sub-surface - magnetics, eddy currents, ultrasonic and thermography (metallic/composite materials) (metallic materials) (metallic/composite materials)
Internal - ultrasonic, thermography and X-ray Ultrasonic energy can penetrate metallic Eddy currents are induced using a small Using a booth which protects the
and composite materials to detect electrically magnetised coil. A hand-held operator from X-rays, the component
cracking and delamination. This technique eddy current probe is passed over an to be tested is clamped to a mount
is used both in manufacturing and on the alloy which can contain the eddy current. and then placed into the booth,
These methods can reveal the location, size and severity
aircraft’s structure in service. When it passes over the defect you can the door then closes automatically,
of any defects within a component. see the display on the screen.
a. Longitudinal wave The component is then exposed to
A straight beam from the probe For fastener hole inspection we use a X-rays of the wavelength which are best
measures the thickness and detects rotating probe which is passed through suited for the feature to be detected.
features within the beam path. the bore of the hole. When it encounters
As it is a digital X-ray you are able
a defect it is displayed on the screen;
b. Shear wave to enhance the image by modifying
this signal is adjusted for diagnosis.
Beams at varying angles can be the settings.
generated in metal called shear waves. This is a very common method for
Finally when you have saved the image,
For example, this method could be used in-service aircraft.
you can enhance it further by examining
to detect cracks from holes with the
chromatic differences.
fasteners installed.
c. Phased array
Using multiple probes in an array, internal
The aerospace industry is supported
features can be mapped, and for metallic
Steven CRUMMACK (left) Jean-Pierre LOZES (right)
parts, the beam can be steered to
by a group of specialised suppliers,
Senior NDT Engineer NDT Team Leader
examine an area from a range of angles.
AIRBUS AIRBUS
The maximum reflection is obtained by many of whom use technology originally
tilting to the correct angle.
This increases sensitivity compared to
developed for the medical industry.
conventional shear waves.
45#TSAF
02
45#TSAF
12
Non-Destructive Testing Non-Destructive Testing
4. Infrared 5. Magnetic 6. Fluorescent dye
thermography particle penetrant
(metallic/composite materials) (metallic materials) (metallic materials)
Infrared cameras are used to exploit the This testing method uses fluorescing This NDT method, mainly used in
reaction of different materials after they magnetic particles suspended in a fluid. manu facturing, is effective at detecting
pass from a thermally stressed state, surface breaking cracks in non-porous
The liquid is applied to the magnetized
back to ambient temperature. materials (primarily metallic).
component, which then attracts the
During this process, the infrared energy
par ticles to magnetic flux leakage The component is covered in dye
they transmit can be detected and used
generated by defects and its edges penetrant ink which enters surface
to display relative difference between
breaking features. Afterwards the object
materials. The method is limited to ferromagnetic
is rinsed, leaving the remaining dye in the
For example, water trapped inside materials only.
defects. It is inspected under a ultraviolet
composite honeycomb sandwich panels
black light where the defect fluoresces,
can be highlighted, effective for both
against a dark background.
rudders and elevators.
Fluorescent dye penetrant inspection
as performed in Airbus’ Nantes (France) facility.
a)
Directly after the surface treatment
process, the parts are placed
in an oven to dry excess moisture.
b)
Parts are sprayed
with a florescent dye. CONCLUSION
Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) has become a valued and necessary
c) expertise in the manufacturing and maintenance of Airbus’ fleet.
Residual dye is rinsed off
Airbus monitors the structure of in-service aircraft ensuring safety
revealing any surface
and saving weight at the design stage. We believe it will continue
discontinuities where the dye
to increase, bringing added value as the engineering community
has penetrated.
becomes more aware of its benefits.
d)
Parts are oven-dried again For customers’ queries on NDT, please contact:
then visually controlled
with an UV light. Rolland FILAQUIER
Structure Engineering Support Customer Services - AIRBUS - rolland.filaquier@airbus.com
Alain TISSENIER
Non-destructive Testing Manual (NTM) training - AIRBUS - alain.tissenier@airbus.com
45#TSAF
22
45#TSAF
32
Structure Health Monitoring
Structure Health
Easing and foreseeing maintenance by Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM)
In the past decades, aircraft on-board self-testing functions evolved from Built-In Test
Equipment (BITE) which has been applied on engines and other components essential
Monitoring
for flight operations, to complex integrated systems’ architectures.
A real-time on-board
SHM is completing the global CBM. The integration of structural on-board monitoring
capabilities into the aircraft monitoring and management network is a key enabler for
‘stethoscope’
CBM. By replacing scheduled inspections with real-time monitoring or monitoring on
demand, SHM delivers increased aircraft availability through the optimization of
for Condition-Based
unscheduled maintenance and accurate follow-up of an eventual degradation.
Maintenance The benefit of CBM versus classic structure inspections
Currently, continued airworthiness and reliability targets are achieved using a
comprehensive set of predefined scheduled maintenance tasks. The new releases
of regulatory guidance on SHM, issued from advice and discussions on requirements
and approaches, have been prepared for the validation of SHM systems.
What does switching from the existing inspection programme approach to CBM mean
from a continued airworthiness point of view? Let’s look at typical routine of structure
inspections carried out at predetermined intervals as a function over time, flight hours
or flight cycles.
If we take the time-based model as an example (see figure 1), the degradation will
increase over time. The initial period can be described as ‘good performance’ where
Lorenz WENK Dr. Clemens BOCKENHEIMER
the degradation rate is low, or even very low. During this period, classic visual inspec-
Maintenance Programme Materials
tion techniques may even fail to identify that degradation has started. It is during this
Engineering & Processes
period where many structural inspections feature an interval threshold to account for
AIRBUS AIRBUS
the good initial performance of an aircraft. However, as time progresses, degradation
lorenz.wenk@airbus.com clemens.bockenheimer@airbus.com
is inevitable and the acceptable condition of the structural item is questioned.
In case the inspection finds degradation which has passed the predefined limit that
ensures safe operation until the subsequent inspection, the items must be restored.
The respective benchmark is named ‘restoration limit’ in the example model.
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) is an innovative way of
Consequently the progressing degradation after Check #2 in our example should stay
on-board Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) to directly assess above the operational safety limits before Check #3, when the restoration limit was not
reached at the time of Check #2. With this, the safety margin between the safety limit
the integrity of aircraft structures. The principle of SHM is
and failure are maintained. The restoration limit and the repeat interval are interde-
comparable to the human nervous system. Discrete sensors pendent and set by trading of economics.
which form a network remain permanently mounted onto,
or embedded into the aircraft structure, detect and diagnose
inevitable structural damage, mechanical loads or abnormal Good
performance
Restoration to Restoration to conditions. The sensors are interrogated via an ‘on-board’
acceptance level acceptance level
or ‘off-board’ diagnostic system and information on the Restoration limit
structural state is reported to maintenance.
In contrast to conventional NDT, there is no need for a qualified NDT inspector to
access the area of inspection and to perform the measurement by hand-held NDT
probes which is in most cases costly and time consuming.
As a result, SHM shows for selected use cases a great potential to reduce time and
Checks performed
cost for maintenance, to increase the aircraft availability and to realise innovative
aircraft design for the reduction of weight.
This example shows a classic finding rate of No Item Listed (NIL) at Check #1
Airbus is developing SHM onto its new generation aircraft to ease structural and #2 and a ‘Degradation Finding” at Check #3. The item is then restored to
maintenance, beyond the wider Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM), meaning near to new quality and is found NIL again at Check #4, degradation is again
doing maintenance when the need arises (i.e. after one or more indicators show that found at Check #5, to be once again restored.
equipment or structure is going to fail or is deteriorating).
The evolving integration of on-board systems into the avionics’ network and
broadband data communication capabilities are setting the scene for a step change
that aims at bringing significant benefits to the operators.
noitcnuf
Operation limit
(if function effects safety)
Failure
Risk of operation
with failure
if not detected
at Check #3
time
#1 NIL #2 NIL #3 Finding #4 NIL
Good
performance
System detectability limit
Maintenance notification limit
Operational limit
Safety margin
Failure
noitcnuf
Figure 1:
Example of a typical classic
scheduled inspection scenario
showing the generic performance
of an aircraft structure
versus in-service life time
#5 Finding
DEGRADATION
Maintenance/Operations margin
Parameter monitoring Parameter trend Maintenance No operation
monitoring and calculation window with failure
of time to loss of function (planning
& fix)
time
System detection Potential
of first degradation cockpit
message
Maintenance
message
A second aspect is that restoration does not often bring the item back to its initial state Flight testing today
(a restored Item is normally close, but not exactly the same quality of a new item).
Airbus’ key research today is focusing on opportunities around the A350 XWB
This conservatism however is necessary to build robust inspection programmes on the
(Extra Wide Body) and its extensive structural use of Carbon Fibre Reinforced
current fleet level condition monitoring approach. Inspections resulting in ‘no finding’ could
Polymer (CFRP).
possibly have been deferred on that aircraft, but there is however still potential for findings
on other aircraft triggered by the variation of an individual aircraft’s operational conditions A wide range of uses for SHM is being explored by our design specialists, such as
and occurrences. In other words, effectiveness of the inspection programme is validated by pre-load measurement in the tension bolts of the vertical tail plane attachment,
the ‘no finding’ rate at fleet level - the current fleet level condition monitoring concept. and in-situ measurement of in-service loads in the horizontal stabilizer.
However the most prominent and challenging system currently being developed
Switching the global concept to CBM brings maintenance from monitoring fleet
is one that immediately detects and assesses accidental ground handling impact
level conditions by inspecting every aircraft of a fleet, to managing the individual
damage to CFRP in door surround areas (see figure 3).
aircraft airworthiness against predetermined safety and economic limits with built-in
monitoring capabilities.
Let’s look into the semantics of such an approach (see figure 2). The on-board system
monitors the relevant parameter over time and as from the initial detection, a prognostic
function provides a status input on the overall condition monitoring system for the structural
item. When the ‘maintenance notification limit’ is reached, the airline’s Maintenance Control
Centre (MCC) is notified by the aircraft system. Maintenance can now start planning the
restoration slot within the ‘maintenance window’ (e.g. packaged together with other
deferred items in a dedicated shop visit) to optimize the aircraft availability. A cockpit
message informs the flight crew and the MCC if the degradation is about to approach an
‘operational limit’, providing a clear status of the individual aircraft’s remaining operational
capabilities (e.g. number of flight cycles/hours before the item needs to be restored),
limitation of the aircraft’s specific capabilities (reduce flight level and/or reduced load), etc.
Figure 3: In-service damage mapping for the fuselage
of a long-range aircraft. The locations with impact
Figure 2: damage are marked with coloured symbols.
Example of a typical The door surround areas show a high concentration
Condition-Based of impact damage caused during ground handling.
Maintenance scenario
CBM not only eliminates the repeated NIL finding inspections (and associated
down-time) but also provides an online status of the individual aircraft’s conditions.
This clear forecast of the fleet-wide operational capacity enables the airline operations
and maintenance control centres to plan ahead and increase aircraft availability.
7% 13% 7% 5% 15% 31% 22%
SHM technology flying on Airbus aircraft today
standard wings nose cone doors passenger door surrounds cargo door surrounds
An example of a fairly straight forward and effective Airbus SHM application flying fuselage and rear
today is the tail strike indication system (ATA31-28) on its long haul aircraft. sections fuselage
Initially developed with the A340-500/600, an adapted version is also on-board the
A380. Equipped with 2x2 redundancies (two sensors with two crack-wire lines each),
the system provides the flight deck with a clear online indication of conditions
to complement the pilot’s feel, during take-off manoeuvres. While the main aim is
to enhance the overall safety, it is interesting to note that it also enabled Airbus
designers to achieve a significant weight saving by integrating the tail strike system
capabilities into the structure design.
45#TSAF
42
45#TSAF
52
Structure Health Monitoring Structure Health Monitoring
Good
performance
Restoration to Restoration to
acceptance level acceptance level
Restoration limit
Checks performed
noitcnuf
Operation limit
(if function effects safety)
Failure
Risk of operation
with failure
if not detected
at Check #3
time
#1 NIL #2 NIL #3 Finding #4 NIL
Good
performance
System detectability limit
Maintenance notification limit
Operational limit
Safety margin
Failure
noitcnuf
#5 Finding
DEGRADATION
Maintenance/Operations margin
Parameter monitoring Parameter trend Maintenance No operation
monitoring and calculation window with failure
of time to loss of function (planning
& fix)
time
System detection Potential
of first degradation cockpit
message
Maintenance
message
Global percentage of impacts by zones on the aircraft
Example on the A320 Family
Acoustic-ultrasonic principle How Airbus addresses SHM technology
The SHM system for impact damage detection and assessment of door surround Airbus’ Material and Process (M&P) domain is responsible for the development
structure uses acoustic-ultrasonic technology. and qualification of SHM technologies. In order to provide the best technical solution
at minimum time and cost, Airbus’ M&P department not only works in close collaboration
Acoustic-ultrasonic systems use an array network of piezoelectric transducers acting
with disciplines from stress and design, systems, customer support and manufacturing
as sensors and actuators for guided ultrasonic waves. These waves interact with
but also interacts with a world-wide network of technology suppliers, system integrators,
structural damage such as delamination and de-bonding. Structural integrity is
institutes, academia, airworthiness authorities and other aircraft manufacturers.
diagnosed through analysis of changes in wave characteristics before and after the
damaged area (see figure 4). Airbus M&P domain has developed a so called ‘SHM Toolbox’ which provides
a complete set of technological solutions for generic applications, ready to use
This system is under development and is being tested in two kinds of fuselage ground
by design engineers to further enhance aircraft capabilities and performance.
validators, as well as in-flight validators within the A350 XWB CFRP skin panel
demonstrator of the A340 MSN001 (see figures 5 & 6), and in the surround structure As SHM is merging the worlds of materials, structure and systems, it requires a clear
of the passenger door 1 of the A350 XWB (see figure 7). concept to ensure the success of the application. To achieve this cross-functional aim,
teams have been formed to integrate the structural sensing technology with the
aircraft monitoring system architecture. This approach has successfully led Airbus to
establish a comprehensive set of key requirement families for SHM. In the course of
the JASTAC (Japanese SHM Technologies for Aircraft Composite structures) project,
in close cooperation with Mitsubishi, Kawasaki, Fuji Heavy Industries, Japanese
Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) and the University of Tokyo, detailed requirements
have been validated in test campaigns expanding on well-established NDT (Non-
Destructive Testing) and material test principles. These requirements have set the
reference for ongoing research and technology projects like the Vertical Tail Plane
- Next Generation (VTP-NG) rib de-bonding detection system. Furthermore, these
requirements have also been the bases for the Aerospace Recommended Practice
(ARP-6461) guidelines for implementation of SHM on fixed-wing aircraft.
Principally, SHM is developed and deployed in four generations in which the SHM
system is given step-by-step more complexity, features and responsibility, in order
to gain confidence in this new kind of technology:
Generation 0 For the monitoring of structural tests - already deployed in the course
of the A380 and A350 XWB component and full-scale testing.
Generation 1 For in-service aircraft with benefits in maintenance - has achieved
technology readiness for selected technologies and given applications.
Generation 2 For in-service aircraft with benefits in maintenance and weight savings
at component level - under development.
Generation 3 For in-service aircraft with benefits in maintenance, weight savings on
aircraft level and intrinsic quality assessment in manufacturing and assembly - under
development.
Today, the emphasis is not on the development of further new SHM technologies,
but on testing the SHM system’s robustness in representative environments to mature
future service applications.
Potential retrofit applications
With the growing number of older aircraft in service, the business case for SHM retrofit applications is gaining more and more
momentum. Such an application is typically Generation 1 and aimed at known structure hotspots, associated with significant
down-time due to heavy access and complex repetitive inspections, as well as low finding rates. While a high finding rate due to the
down-time for access and repair alleviates the business case, it is even more worthwhile if the repeat inspection is removed from
the maintenance schedule.
The extensive in-service history and testing of ageing structures in the frame of the current ‘long range’ and ‘single aisle’
Extended Service Goal (ESG) campaigns provide comprehensive data for airframe designers studying potential SHM applications.
With this detailed knowledge, the most appropriate technology can be selected from the Airbus ‘SHM Toolbox’ and adapted to
the specific application. Retrofit applications are planned to have a dedicated focus on monitoring only age-related degradation
parameters like fatigue, corrosion and delamination. The target SHM technology is lightweight, easy to install and simple to use. 45#TSAF
62
45#TSAF
72
Structure Health Monitoring Structure Health Monitoring
Figure 4: Acoustic-ulltrasonic system principle
Sensor Damage Guided
ultrasonic waves
Figures 5 & 6: SHM impact damage detection system sensor network installed
in the A350 XWB CFRP composite panel demonstrator of the A340 MSN001.
Figure 7: Digital Mock-Up (DMU) display of the
acoustic-ultrasonic sensor network arrangement
in the passenger door 1 of the A350 XWB MSN001
The Comparative
The Aerospace Recommended Practice (ARP-6461) guidelines for implementation
Vacuum Method (CVMTM)
of SHM on fixed-wing aircraft have been published by the Society of Automotive
CVMTM is an excellent example for ready Engineers (SAE) G-11SHM committee in November 2013. Airbus is a key initiator
to use Generation 1 SHM technology for and driver of this committee consisting of the world’s leading aircraft manufacturers
monitoring crack initiation and growth (Airbus, Boeing, Bombardier and Embraer), airlines, system integrators and airworthi-
against pre-defined limits. ness authorities (EASA and FAA).
The principle behind CVMTM is uniquely The ARP address es gaps in industry-consensus approaches for SHM applications
simple (see figure 8) and allows crack on commercial aircraft. It represents a significant step forward to reducing the product
inspection in minutes at base or infield. development risk ena bling SHM technologies to buy their way onto commercial
CVMTM is based on a permanently platforms. The document and further details are available on SAE international’s
bonded sensor onto the surface of a website at http://standards.sae.org/arp6461.
component where damage could occur.
The sensor contains a manifold of
alternating fine ‘vacuum galleries’ and
‘air galleries’ that are open to the surface.
In case the area under the surface needs
to be inspected for cracks, vacuum is
applied to the ‘vacuum galleries’ via
a hand-held measurement device, the
‘air galleries’ remain at ambient pressure Regulatory framework – setting new airworthiness standards
and the pressure difference between
Today, the individual operator’s maintenance programme is developed from a number of source documents, including the
‘vacuum galleries’ and ‘air galleries’ is
manufacturer’s Maintenance Review Board (MRB) report, Certification Maintenance Requirements (CMR), Airworthiness Limitations
recorded. If no flaw is present, the
Items (ALI) typically summarized in the Maintenance Planning Document (MPD) plus unique national regulatory requirements
pressure difference will remain at a stable crack is automatically detected. The spacing between the ‘vacuum
and others.
level. However, if a crack develops under Sensors are widely flexible in design and galleries’ and ‘air galleries’ determines
the sensor, air will flow through the thus adaptable to a wide range of target the minimum detectable damage size. Since the late nineties, Airbus has been actively working in various industry committees to build a robust certification path for
passage created from the ‘air galleries’ applications. They may either take the CVMTM for crack detection has been bringing SHM from the laboratories into service. In April 2009 the International Maintenance Review Board Policy Board (IMRBPB)
to the ‘vacuum galleries’, the pressure form of self-adhesive polymer ‘pads’ developed between Airbus and the accepted the revision of maintenance guidelines for the creation of aircraft scheduled maintenance programmes contained in the
difference drops significantly and the or may form part of the test component. supplier SMS to technology readiness. Airlines For America (A4A)* ATA MSG-3 document to cater for use of SHM technology instead of visual and NDT inspections.
Evolving over the generations, built-in self-test capabilities have enabled manufacturers to design a variety of systems that render a
Smart structures and materials for the future growing portion of scheduled maintenance tasks redundant. Namely, engine monitoring and buzz words like Built-In Test Equipment
(BITE) are leading examples of the trend towards further integration of the aircraft systems’ architecture. In the future, we can think
The research focuses on multi-functional smart structures and materials with built-in self-sensing, optimized weight and lower costs
that ‘aircraft health monitoring’ will become one of its core elements.
for global structural CBM. For example, Airbus is developing optical fibre sensors which are capable of detecting, localising and
assessing impact damage, as well as monitoring structural loads. These small diameter optical fibre sensors (50 µm to 125 µm) are Nose to tail SHM capabilities addressing the full envelope of structure conditions are essential to establish aircraft health monitoring
mounted or embedded into the CFRP structure in the course of the manufacturing process. In addition, the same optical fibres are as an enabler for ultimately switching from scheduled maintenance programmes to Condition-Based Maintenance (CBM).
developed to be used for transferring system’s data instead of using heavy conventional data cabling which in turn leads to massive
*formerly Air Transport Association (ATA) of America
weight savings.
Lay-up
Airbus’ future design concepts do not
limit the SHM function to monitoring
Optical fibre
structure conditions during the service
network
life of the aircraft. SHM technology
by means of embedded optical fibre
sensors, for instance, is developed in the Curing Temperature, Operation
flow and/or cure
course of JASTAC project (see section monitoring Usage and health
monitoring
above) to become an integral aspect of
life-cycle monitoring of CFRP structures,
covering lay-up of the part, curing, Life-cycle
Non-uniform
cooling and demoulding, assembly and temperature monitoring Deformation
operation (see figure 9). Throughout the Damage
manufacturing and assembly of CFRP
Cooling and demoulding Assembly
parts, SHM provides direct access to
the physical characteristics of the parts Residual strain Strain monitoring monitoring
(e.g. temperature and stress field during
cure, degree of cure, residual stress
build-up during assembly) enabling
an intrinsic quality control together Distortion Joints
with further weight optimized design.
45#TSAF
53
CONCLUSION
In the past decade, aeronautical Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) has moved from extensive research and
lab-testing, to the definition of a comprehensive application set-up, now ready for use. Airbus’ current focus
is on the maturation of selected key SHM technologies and on the development of multi-functional smart
structures with built-in self-sensing, optimized weight materials.
SHM is now at the doorstep of retrofit applications ready to monitor structural hotspots on the ageing aircraft
in service today. The main benefit for this retro-application is increased aircraft availability and further gained
service experience. Furthermore, SHM technology will be a vital feature on Airbus’ future component design.
By fully integrating SHM into the aircraft’s monitoring architecture, it will bring significant weight savings and
overall further increased aircraft availability. In addition, SHM will significantly reduce the repeated maintenance
tasks which often lead to No Item Listed (NIL).
Structural Health Monitoring is like having a permanent on-board doctor to detect degradation as-and-when it
occurs, assess its impact, then treat it in a timely manner. The result is a healthy aircraft with enhanced operability:
lighter, safer and easier to maintain.
45#TSAF
82
45#TSAF
92
Structure Health Monitoring Structure Health Monitoring
Figure 8: Principle set-up of CVMTM technology for crack detection, comprising
a sensor which is bonded to the aircraft structure, a hand-held measurement device
and a connector to which the sensing device and the sensor are connected.
Figure 9: Life-cycle monitoring of a CFRP part by means of embedded optical fibre sensors,
covering lay-up, curing, cooling and demoulding, assembly and operation.
161-351
)3102(
84
A
traP
:setisopmoC
,.IA .te
adekaT
ouboN
Test Point Plug (TPP) Sensor
• Pneumatic connections
• ID data lead
Test Point Socket (TPS) xxxxxx
• Pneumatic connections
x x x x x x x x x x x x • ID chip re v a a d c o u u u t m P • M G r 2 a 0 p 0 hic display
• Electronics
• Transducers
• Vacuum reservoir
& pumps
PC connection
• USB PC/Laptop
• Database Main test (with crack)
• Upload/download utility
Event reporting
45#TSAF
13
Importance of reporting
In-service event data
In order to continually monitor the safety of its fleet Airbus needs to know what events
occur during operations. While every conceivable condition is either flight tested or
events from the field
replicated during certification activities (read telemetry article page 4), perfectly accurate
predictions of events that may arise after years of service are harder to define.
The exhaustive reporting of events from the field and the quality of such data are
important steps to get a global understanding of how our aircraft behave and respond
Continuous improvement of Airbus aircraft’s safety
to conditions that are met during daily operations.
Your input allows Airbus to perform its duty
in terms of continued airworthiness
and safety enhancement.
Reports of occurrences are systematically analysed within Airbus, and good quality,
timely data is required to enable us to perform efficient and effective analysis of the
events. This data also helps Airbus develop an understanding of developing trends
in the fleet which may have an impact on the safe operation of the fleet - this is one
Continually enhancing our products’ safety level
of the cornerstones for the ongoing activity of safety enhancement.
is more than a corporate objective for Airbus;
It is not just information from the field that provides us with the global view of safety
right from the beginning, a safety culture
within our fleet; we consolidate the reports from our operators by capturing safety
has been instilled into our employees related data coming from internal channels such as the production, flight test and
engineering domains.
and has become part of their daily lives.
Why is reporting important?
Further to a non-Airbus aircraft accident, the investigating authorities
identified that the aircraft had been flying with an identified fault for a number
of flight cycles before the accident; this fault had not been reported.
The investigating board concluded that failure of reporting limited the
effectiveness of existing safety programmes, meaning that it could result
in an inaccurate assessment of risks by both airlines and aircraft
manufacturers, which limits their ability to manage the risks.
Further to this, the investigating authority issued recommendations
on the need to make operators aware of the importance of reporting.
As an aircraft manufacturer, Airbus François CARMIGNANI (left)
is continuously looking at enhancing Head of Product Safety Enhancement Analysis
global fleet safety of our aircraft. AIRBUS
We do this not just by applying the francois.carmignani@airbus.com
continued airworthiness obligations
(EASA Part 21.3 - ORO.GEN.160 Patrice CHASSARD (middle)
of EU Regulation 965/2012, EASA Continued Airworthiness Process Manager
AMC 20-8), but looking beyond, AIRBUS
and analysing events that may patrice.chassard@airbus.com
impact the continued safe operation
Patrick GRAVE (right)
of the aircraft.
Customer Services Expert
AIRBUS
patrick.grave@airbus.com
45#TSAF
03
45#TSAF
23
45#TSAF
33
Event reporting Event reporting
Where does Airbus get input from?
Airbus can only review events that have been reported, so the more data collected, the
better the analysis. Our main source of data comes from the fleet of nearly 8,000 Airbus
aircraft currently in service.
The new European operational regulation (ORO.GEN.160 of EU Regulation 965/2012),
obliges European operators to report in-service events to manufacturers and national
authorities in line with identified regulatory criteria (similar to EASA AMC 20-8 guidance
material).
In addition to European operational regulation, Airbus encourages operators to report
in-service events that are:
• Identified by EASA AMC 20-8 guidance material,
• Defined by your own airworthiness authority
• Considered as added value for the safety enhancement level of Airbus’ fleet.
Events should be reported via existing communication channels with Airbus’ Customer
Services, Engineering department, Field Service Managers (FSM), and/or Customer Support
Directors (CSD).
These criteria cover events that fall within EASA Part 21 requirements.
This will enable us to analyse, review and introduce actions to enhance the continued
safety of our fleet.
Repair requests or reports made outside of these criteria are not considered as answering
the formal reporting process requested by European regulations.
If in doubt about whether an event
How are these reports processed by Airbus?
is important, the best action is always
All events reported to Airbus are collected and analysed in order to address the
to report the information. basic continued airworthiness obligation, and also to look beyond the regulations.
Any events that are identified as having a potential impact on fleet airworthiness are
An event you may think of as an isolated analysed by the Continued Airworthiness activity within Airbus. Following technical
investigations and risk analysis, occurrences presenting potentially unsafe conditions
Each report,
case may have a bigger impact are formally presented to the EASA during regular face-to-face Airworthiness Review
Meetings (ARM). Events that are identified as safety related, are also internally
even if it seems
on a global fleet level. investigated and assessed, not just to ensure that the continued airworthiness safety
objectives are still met, but also to proactively detect areas to be improved.
similar to the
It is important to note that such activities are not only based on the investigation
previous one, of individual reported events but is also on the review of the related trends.
Each report, even if it seems similar to the previous one, remains important.
remains
Based on these reviews, specific action plans can be developed in order to contain,
correct and prevent repetition of safety issues in a timely, efficient and effective manner
important.
and also to capture lessons learnt for integration into future developments.
Who performs the safety reviews?
On top of the continued airworthiness obligation, an internal process ensures
that the safety related events are reviewed cross-domain and cross-functionality.
Panels of experts in the domains of engineering, flight operations and training, flight
testing, accidents-major incidents, production, maintenance and security meet
to consider whether the safety related event impacts their domain.
There is also a regular collegial discussion, where the experts from the panels
share their findings and ensure that all disciplines have been taken into account.
Events
Comprehensive
and timely • EASA AMC 20-8 guidelines
reporting • Criteria defined by your own local authorities
with accurate
• Considered as added value for safety enhancement
data/info
• Customer Services engineering
via existing
and Flight Operations department
customer
• Field Service Manager (FSM)
channels
• Customer Support Director (CSD)
EASA Continued Airworthiness review panel
Maintenance panel Production panel
Engineering panel Security panel
Training & Flight Operational panel
Accident-Major incident investigation panel
Action plans
COLLEGIAL PANEL
Lessons learnt
45#TSAF
43
45#TSAF
53
Event reporting Event reporting
Example of event reporting and corrective procedure
A380 - Waste water service panel door
FR86
FR91
In order to fully understand and classify
the issue, the event reporting originator
Z160
needs to collect all relevant information
Issue (thanks to in-service event reporting)
• Several service panels found damaged/missing on in-service • DFDR (Digital Flight Data Recording)
aircraft between 2009 and 2011 • PFR (Post Flight Report)
• Door does not latch correctly
• Trouble-shooting data
Interim management
• Log book
• Inspection of the waste water servicing panel per ISB 52-8016
Rev. 00 dated 24 Feb 2010 • Inspection reports
• In case the pushbutton is not flush (level) with the panel • Photos (highest possible quality
before departure, it is recommended to:
and from different angles)
- apply high-speed tape on the door surrounding, or
- remove the door and dispatch the aircraft under MCDL 52-08 • Maintenance action(s) taken
Corrective actions • Component removal(s)
• Design change launched of the service door: • Pilot reports
- introduction of more robust latches
• Any particular relevant information
- addition of a retaining strut
• Modifications Service Bulletin A380-52-8017 available
CONCLUSION
Reporting events directly to Airbus enhances fleet safety and contributes to safer aircraft operations
within the air transport system.
Improving event reports is a key factor, and operators and MRO (Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul)
organisations are encouraged to report events to Airbus, even if the event is considered irrelevant.
It is important to remember that the timeliness and quality of the data is paramount, in allowing
an effective and efficient investigation.
Airbus is not requesting the implementation of extra processes, but as a guideline, we recommend
using the format already in place with your own airworthiness authority (e.g. by filling in
an Air Safety Report, Major Occurrence Report, Safety Data Report, etc.) and to use existing
communication channels with Airbus.
45#TSAF
63
45#TSAF
73
A320 Family noise reduction
noise
A320 Family
Operators’ most appreciated single aisle
reduction aircraft, is a step-ahead in noise reduction.
Noise certification standards evolution
ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) Annex 16 defines an evolving noise
certification standard to ensure that aircraft manufacturers implement the latest noise
The best gets quieter
reduction technology available. These increasingly stringent standards are the result
of a process that guarantees environmental benefits, while remaining technically
feasible and economically reasonable.
An industry vision of how to contribute to sustainable growth with respect to airport
noise is to allow for traffic growth by continuous efforts in reducing perceived aircraft
Article by Noise from aircraft operations impacting
operations noise that deliver at least constant or decreasing noise exposure footprints.
Pierre LEMPEREUR
communities in the vicinity of airports
To progress towards this objective, Airbus leads the industry with each new generation
Acoustics Engineer
AIRBUS is recognized as the major source of annoyance of aircraft achieving dramatically aggressive noise reduction targets.
pierre.lempereur@airbus.com Furthermore, Airbus operators expect that during its production life-cycle, the noise
from the air transport industry.
impact of an aircraft family will be reduced. This is a key contributor to the programme’s
Emmanuelle AYGAT longevity as it mitigates environmental impact and maximizes airport community
Environmental Impact Marketing Manager Annoyance not only results from perceived noise levels, sound quality and the acceptance and subsequently, its economic efficiency.
AIRBUS
number of “events” (aircraft take-offs, landings, etc.) occurring in a period of time,
This is particularly relevant to the short/medium range category of aircraft like the
emmanuelle.aygat@airbus.com
it also depends on social and psychological factors.
A320 Family that supports the majority of commercial operations from large airports
In the regions of the world such as Europe, where aviation has been a factor which are engaged in rigorous noise impact management. More than 1,500 airports
of economic development for a long time, noise impact is an important obstacle on all continents have A320 Family operations and an A320 takes-off or lands every
to airport traffic growth. Creating new runways is a subject of huge public debate two seconds.
in certain regions and existing ones are subject to noise restrictions and local
Approximately 6,000 A320 Family aircraft are in service today and the current backlog
regulations of increasing severity.
is 4,240 aircraft. This very successful family of aircraft is bought by almost 200
customers, a number 47% higher than the competition.
BdNPE
Evolution of ICAO Annex 16 noise standards
and correlative improvements of Airbus aircraft
Chapter CFM56-5A CFM56-58 Nacelle Sharklets A320neo
V2500-A3 V2500-A5 improvements (prediction)
2
25
20
15 Chapter
3
10
5 Chapter
4
0
Chapter
14
-5
-10
-15
-20
1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020
• A300/A310 Family • A320 Family • A330/A340 Family • A380
Balanced approach to airport noise mitigation
ICAO resolution A33-7 - voted in October 2001
ICAO
International Civil Aviation Organization
CAEP
Noise Land use
Committee on Aviation Environmental Protection
reduction planning &
at source management
Reducing
air
Aircraft and engine Airports and national
transport
manufacturers & local authorities
noise
impact
AAiirrccrraafftt
Operational
ooppeerraattiinngg
procedures
rreessttrriiccttiioonnss
Inter-
dependencies
Noise emission
Operators and
Fuel economy
Air Navigation
Service Providers
45#TSAF
83
45#TSAF
93
A320 Family noise reduction A320 Family noise reduction
A320 propulsion system noise reduction
When it was designed in the early 1980’s, the A320 incorporated the latest technolo-
gies in the areas of aerodynamics, structures, systems and high bypass ratio engines.
It achieved a disruptive noise improvement relative to similar aircraft in service at that
Ronald Regan
time. Its noise footprint for a given perceived noise level was about five times less than
Washington National
the majority of the in-service fleet. Airport
Certification in compliance to ICAO Annex 16 Chapter 3 was achieved by the A320
in 1988 with sufficient margins to be able to comply with Chapter 4 when this new
standard was enforced in 2006.
Research and Technology (R&T) work undertaken by Airbus and engine manufacturers
for contemporary aircraft programmes like the A380 and A350 XWB (Extra Wide Body),
generated spin-off applications with significant noise reduction and low impact design
8 miles
changes to the A320 Family. Actually, some of these new technologies and design 13 kms
improvements were subsequently implemented in the A320 Family production lines.
The main steps that resulted in significant improvements on noise levels were:
• New engines technologies:
- CFM56-5B engine with new fan blades design, larger fan case and improved
thermodynamic cycle
- V2500A5 engines with new fan blades design, improved thermodynamic cycle
and additional acoustic treatment in the primary nozzle
• Improved acoustic treatment in the forward CFM56 engine fan case
and extension of nacelle acoustic treatment in the bypass duct
• “Chevron” type design of the primary nozzle exhaust (V-shaped form).
Overall these modifications have reduced the certified noise levels of all A320 Family Footprint 75 dBA take-off
models by more than three EPNdB (Effective Perceived Noise in Decibels) in terms
of cumulative margin compared with ICAO Annex16 noise standards. IA320-200 I Competition’s footprint in same category
The A320 reduced
the noise footprint by five.
Chevron nozzle New fan blades design
ICAO recognizes that aviation industry noise reduction is dependent on a balanced
three-pillar approach to achieve airport noise mitigation:
1) Noise reduction at source by design and technology improvement,
2) Operations according to noise abatement procedures,
3) Noise management: land use planning and understanding annoyance factors.
The success of these three pillars in effectively reducing the noise impact, is expected
to minimize the need to apply operating restrictions that would be detrimental to the
efficiency of air transport.
Noise metrics
EPNdB: Effective Perceived Noise level in dB is the noise metric used in certification accounting
for annoyance factors related to spectral content, tonal emergence and flyover duration.
dBAmax: abbreviated as dBA is the maximum A-weighted overall sound pressure level
measured during an operational event (take-off or landing). It is widely used by airports’
communities for assessing the peak noise level associated to an aircraft movement.
45#TSAF
04
45#TSAF
14
A320neo
“Sharklet” wing tip devices
In addition to sharklets and air flow deflectors, the new engine options (neo) for the
More recently (in 2012), the “sharklet” wing tip modification, primarily designed to
A320neo offer new and improved PW1100 and LEAP1A engines, with very high
improve high speed aerodynamic efficiency and consequently fuel consumption, also
bypass ratios (between ten-to-one and twelve-to-one), with fan diameters up to 81
provides enhanced low speed climb rate capability that results in take-off/fly-over noise
inches, and using the latest propulsion system acoustic design and technologies.
reduction by up to one EPNdB. This modification has achieved considerable commercial
success; today more than 430 equipped aircraft are in service with 74 operators and The nacelles incorporate acoustic technology successfully proven with the A380 and
retrofit campaigns are ongoing. A350 XWB such as a “zero splice” air inlet acoustic liner, significantly suppressing fan
noise over the whole range of engine operating conditions during approach, take-off
and climb.
Air flow deflectors
It is expected that the certified noise levels will be reduced, on average by four EPNdB
The R&T work aiming at tackling aerodynamic noise sources previously masked by at take-off and two EPNdB at approach (compared with the current delivery standard).
engine noise, has led to the introduction of underwing ‘air flow deflectors’. This would give a cumulative margin of 15 EPNdB with reference to Chapter 4 and
These devices were implemented in production in June of 2014. They are now also subsequently would comply with Chapter 14 standards to be implemented by 31st
available as a retrofit modification. December 2017.
When positioned just ahead of underwing cavities associated with the fuel over-pressure The A320neo is already a big commercial success with 2,645 orders from 50
protection system, these devices prevent the cavities from generating any tonal noise customers, representing a 57% market share. Airlines and leasing companies from
emerging from other airframe and engine noise sources. all over the world have chosen this aircraft for its reduced noise levels, as well as
for its 15% lower fuel burn.
This is particularly noticeable when engines are on idle during the descent phases,
with speeds superior of 180 knots, and typically 12 to 50 kilometres from landing.
Typically these deflectors reduce noise by 9 to 11 dBA. The air flow deflector has little Cumulative noise margins compared to
impact on weight (< 150 grams) and no impact on aero efficiency. ICAO Annex 16 - Chapter 14 noise standards
A320 current engine option (ceo) and predicted margins for the A320 new engine option (neo)
Reduced noise with the neo compared to the current A320 Family (excluding A318 aircraft)
• Average of -4 EPNdB at take-off
• Average of -2 EPNdB during approach
CONCLUSION
Initially designed to reduce disruptive noise compared to the previous
generation of single aisle aircraft, the A320 Family has continuously
improved performance and become quieter throughout its production life.
New noise reduction designs and technologies such as sharklets and air
flow deflectors are also available as upgrades allowing aircraft to stay ahead
of increasingly repressive noise certification requirements.
This is particularly true for the latest configuration of the family, the A320neo.
It is expected that this aircraft will allow operators to minimize their airport
community noise impact, and optimize traffic growth in a more sustainable
way.
These noise reductions in parallel with the improved performance
of the A320 Family contribute to the success of this aircraft with airlines
and leasing companies around the world.
BdNPE
0
ceo neo ceo neo ceo neo
-2
Deflector efficiency - far field noise tests
-4
-6
80 -8
75
-10
70
-12
65
-14
60
55 -16
50 -18
45
40
100
Air flow deflectors for the A320 Family - test data
)ZH/Bd(
ytisneD
lartcepS
rewoP
Far field average sound across 40-140° angle of emission - take-off speed 240 Knots
With deflector
Distance (km)
Aircraft noise significantly reduced in the far approach phase
)teef(
thgieH
)Bd(
XAM
ABd
A320 Family noise reduction A320 Family noise reduction
A320 current engine option
with three splices
Sharklets
A320neo (new engine option)
with zero splices
Underwing cavity fitted
with air flow deflector
Sharklets with deflector
Wing tip fences
with deflector
Wing tip fences
without deflector
200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
Frequency (Hz)
Wing tip fences are baseline configuration for A320 Family
Similar results are obtained at 220, 200 and 180 knots
Noise simulated on real flight trajectory collected during a flight test in Toulouse (France) airport in the frame of an R&T project
Impact of air flow deflectors on a continuous descent at -2° slope
9000
8000
Without deflector
7000
6000 240 knots 9 dB
5 dB
5000
4000
180 knots
3000
2000
1000
0
-70 -60 -50 -40 -30 -20 -10 0
FAST
from the PAST
There wouldn’t be any future
without the experience of the past.
45#TSAF
24
egatireH
etaroproC
SDAE
fo
ysetruoc
sotohP
45#TSAF
34
We’ve got it covered
Around the clock, around the world,
Airbus has more than 240 field representatives
Telemetry was used well before based in over 110 cities
the opening of Airbus’ Telemetry
Centre in 1987. Here are some
images of the telemetry station at
Manching airport (south Germany)
used for the VJ 101 and later
programmes during the mid-sixties.
(see telemetry article page 4)
WORLDWIDE TECHNICAL, MATERIAL & LOGISTICS TRAINING CENTRES
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 1980 Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Airbus Training Centre
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 1818 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 Toulouse, France
Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3333
USA/CANADA
airtac@airbus.com Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094
Tel: +1 703 834 3484
Spares AOG/Work Stoppage Airbus Maintenance
Fax: +1 703 834 3464
• Outside the Americas: Training Centre
CHINA Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001 Hamburg, Germany
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011 Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020
aog.spares@airbus.com Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8588
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162
• In the Americas:
Airbus Training Centre Americas
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Tel: +1 70 3729 9000
Miami, Florida - U.S.A.
ADMINISTRATION Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
Tel: +1 305 871 3655
aog.na@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 0413
Fax: +1 305 871 4649
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964
Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas:
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
ifd.spares@airbus.com
Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas:
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
hmv.spares@airbus.com
Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
Please contact your dedicated customer spares
account representative csr.na@airbus.com
We don’t know where
you’ll be going in fi ve
years’ time, but we know
how you’ll get there.
Our numbers will
convince you.
From 250 to over 500 seats, Airbus produces the world’s
most modern and comprehensive widebody product line.
Three families offering unbeatable economics on everything
from short regional routes to the world’s longest
commercial fl ights.
More than 100 airlines worldwide continue to benefi t from the
A330’s unrivalled low operating costs. The A350 XWB set a
new standard of comfort and effi ciency in its class, with 25%
lower fuel consumption compared to existing aircraft.
The A380 allows airlines to increase their contribution to
profi t by up to 50% per fl ight. The A330, A350 and A380
offer unbeatable comfort levels, including more personal
space with minimum 18-inch wide seats as standard in
economy for full service long haul.
Our aircraft have the unique benefi t of full technical and
operational commonality. Reducing costs across the board.
No wonder Airbus is a market leader in widebody passenger
aircraft. A330 A350 A380.
Airbus Widebody Family, our numbers will convince you.
.skramedart
deretsiger
era
seman
tcudorp
eht
dna
ogol
sti
,subriA
.devreser
sthgir
llA
.4102
,SUBRIA
©
Airbus Widebody Family
airbus.com
11841_AIR_WdBdyFmly_OurNumbers_FastMag_297x210_1.0.indd 1 01/07/2014 16:50
