www.airbus.com
The Airbus A380 is leaps ahead. Surpassing current levels of efficiency and
with state-of-the-art cabin design, it embodies 30 years of non-stop innovation.
Airbus, setting the standards.
.skramedartderetsigererasemantcudorpdnaogolsti,subriA
One giant leap.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
8
3
T
S
A
F
38
J U L Y 2 0 0 6
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened
SPARES,SUPPLIER A300/A310 ADVANCED A330/A340 FAMILY HUMAN FACTORS
SUPPORT & WARRANTY COCKPIT PROGRAMME TECHNICAL SYMPOSIUM SYMPOSIUM
SYMPOSIUM TOULOUSE,FRANCE SUN CITY,SOUTH AFRICA MOSCOW,RUSSIA
ATHENS,GREECE 22 - 23 MARCH 2006 28 MAY - 2 JUNE 2006 14 - 16 JUNE 2006
13 - 16 FEBRUARY 2006 A two-day briefing for The latest developments The 22nd Human Factors
Over 70 customer represen- A300/A310 operators in support services from Symposium took place
tatives from Europe and was held in March 2006 Airbus were explained, with the theme of:
Africa and 30 supplier in Toulouse to detail this including FAIR (an inter- ‘Human Factors as a core
companies attended the programme which con- active forum for resolu- value at Airbus’. The sym-
symposium titled ‘Working siders aircraft operation tion of technical issues), posium encompassed HF
together in partnership’. until the year 2025 and AirN@v and e-Catalogue strategy, HF training,
Airlines, MROs and major beyond. With this ad- developments, as well as operations and threat and
suppliers exchanged views vanced cockpit, airlines the new concept for error management in
on how to optimize mainte- would benefit from a sig- Service Bulletins. flight operations, ATC and
nance and operational nificant reduction in The airline caucus identi- maintenance.
costs.Airbus presented the maintenance costs, the fied issues to be addressed, Particular importance was
Airbus Modular Spares FMS2 (Flight Manage- which were landing gear, given to the Human
Services (AMSS), a fully ment System) and the design service goal exten- Factors Toolkit Project,
flexible supplychain serv- new ATM (Air Traffic sion and fuel tank contam- which is intended to rec-
ices approach, enabling Management) capabilities ination. For non-technical oncile Human Factors
customers to focus on their will allow trajectory issues, vendor manage- Theory with operational
individual core business. prediction and optimiza- ment, single source suppli- guidance.
Airbus Supplier monitor- tion, resulting in signifi- ers and AD traceability by The event was sponsored
ing recognized the progress cant fuel saving. part number changes were by ICAO and IAC
made on supplier perform- There was also a review highlighted. Also request- (Interstate Aviation Com-
ance while continuous of the current in-service ed were more frequent mittee) of the CIS
improvement initiatives requirement for enhance- updates outside sympo- (Commonwealth of
with BFE and engines sup- ment of the existing siums. Independent States).
pliers were presented to Flight Management Sys- Operational Excellence
customers. tem memory and data awards were presented.
Airbus Warranty further loading characteristics. Gulf Air was awarded as
demonstrated via an on- Though the Advanced best operator of a small
site classroom the capaci- Cockpit is the long-term fleet of six A330s and
ties of its all-new on-line comprehensive solution Korean Air was awarded as
services, which enhance to this, it was announced top operator of a large fleet
efficiency in everyone’s that feasibility studies to of 19 A330s. China
operations whilst ensuring investigate a shorter term Airlines with a fleet of
protection of customers’ solution are underway, seven A340s and Luft-
rights. further feedback will be hansa German Airlines
given during the third with 39 A340s were award-
quarter of 2006. ed for their excellence.
South African Airways
received the award as best
A340-600 operator.
Coming soon
TRAINING SYMPOSIUM,SAN FRANCISCO,USA,2 - 5 OCTOBER 2006
After an outstanding event in Bangkok in December 2004, Airbus is pleased to announce the eighth dynamic and
highly informative forum dedicated to the Airbus international training scene. This two yearly event provides airline
training professionals with a unique opportunity.
Whether the focus is on flying, cabin safety or aircraft maintenance, participants will get the latest status of all Airbus
training programmes, technologies, techniques and perspectives and will share their Airbus training experience with
the industry’s most senior players. Separate but integrated conference streams covering pilot training, cabin crew train-
ing, maintenance training and simulation & training technologies will complement an exhibition featuring the latest
developments in these fields. Invitations were sent in June 2006.
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
83TSAF
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Publisher:Bruno Piquet
Editor:Kenneth Johnson
Graphic Designer:Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Authorization for reprint of FAST articles should be requested
from the editor at the FAST e-mail address given below
Customer Services Communications
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
E-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer Escourbiac
FAST may be read on Internet
http://www.content.airbusworld.com/SITES/Customer_services/index.html
under Customer Services/Publications
ISSN 1293-5476
Airbus Customer Services
©AIRBUS S.A.S. 2006. All rights reserved
No other intellectual property rights are granted by the delivery of this Magazine than
the right to read it,for the sole purpose of information.This Magazine and its content shall
not be modified and its images shall not be reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus.
This Magazine and the material it contains shall not,in whole or in part,be sold,rented,distributed
or licensed to anythird party.The information contained in this Magazine may vary over time
because of future factors thatmay affect the accuracyof information herein.Airbus assumes no
obligation to update anyinformation contained in this Magazine.When additional information
is required,Airbus S.A.S.can be contacted to provide further details.Airbus,its logo and product
names are registered trademarks.Airbus S.A.S.shall assume no liability for
anydamage in connection with the use of this Magazine and of the materials it contains,
even if Airbus S.A.S.has been advised of the likelihood of such damages
This issue of FAST has been printed on paper
produced without using chlorine,to reduce Photographs:
exm company: Hervé Goussé and Philippe Masclet waste and help conserve natural resources.
Pages 2 to 9: Emirates Airline Every little helps!
1
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
J U L Y 2 0 0 6
38
Performance monitoring of IFE systems 2
Proposal for the future
from Emirates Airline perspective
Mahmood Ameen and Vijay Rathnam
Performance monitoring of IFE systems 10
Airbus vision for the future
Marc Virilli
The A380 maintenance programme is born! 11
Amajor success by all involved
Cover: See A380 maintenance Christian Delmas and Régis Broutee
programme article on page 11
Hypoxia - An invisible enemy 20
Cabin depressurization effects
on human physiology
Hartwig Asshauer
Fuel contamination 26
Prevention and maintenance actions
Christopher McGregor
Fuel contamination 31
Part II
Customer Services 32
Around the clock...Around the world
TITLE - SUB-TITLE
83TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE
There are many parties involved in according to priority/ criticality,
the life cycle of IFE development and review technical logs.
and maintenance. The airlines Moreover, if you are lucky, you
engineering projects team, which is may be apprised of the customer’s
the focal point within an airline, feedback.
works with other departments such
as in-flight services, catering, IFE Inthe end, what you have compiled
media services, maintenance engi- can best be described as a mixed
neering, procurement, spares plan- bag of information, and you have
ning and cabin/IFE maintenance come to realize that the report still
teams. Externally, the projects does not represent how the IFE per-
team interfaces with OEMs formed throughout flight. In addi-
(Original Equipment Manufactu- tion, the compilation process has
rers - Airbus or Boeing), IFE ven- most probably taken considerable
dors, seat vendors, galley vendors, time while the Senior VP is waiting
Airshow/ Camera and other third for the information. It is fair to say
party suppliers. Typically, the that this collection and reporting
development cycle takes well over process is more impromptu than
twoyears from the kick-off stage to organized. Every few weeks or
delivery of the first aircraft with months, you may have to go
operational and certified IFE. through a similar exercise, some
routine, others requested.
Consider the following scenario:
You have worked tirelessly for two What is missing in the above sce-
years along with other teams to nario is a clear and concise method
successfully develop and deliver an of objectively, qualitatively and
IFE system, which is fully installed quantitatively reporting IFE in-ser-
and operational. The responsibility vice performance. Such a reporting
does not stop here. If all goes well, method would provide the most
the first revenue flight with passen- realistic summary of system per-
gers is successful. Over a period of formance throughout the flight.
several months after entry into ser-
vice, as is common with complex This article puts forward proposals
systems ; you find a certain num- to achieve this objective from
ber of problems. On Monday Emirates Airline’s perspective.
morning, your Senior Vice Some alternatives are presented.
President asks your team for input The proposals apply equally to
on how the IFE is performing in both wide body aircraft and single
Today’s In Flight Entertainment (IFE) systems ating system layer,acore software layer, an appli- service. You hastily review the in- aisle aircraft equipped with IFE.
installed in many wide body aircraft are undoubted- cation layer, a BITE (Built-In Test Equipment) service logs, pore over
ly some of the most complex systems engineering reporting layer and a Graphic User Interface MTBUR/MTBF data, scan and res-
professionals have ever designed and developed. (GUI) layer. These are augmented by databases can in-service problems organized
On average, well over 2,000 Line Replaceable that identify an airlines chosen cabin/seat config-
Units (LRUs) are installed and linked by networks uration, overhead display configuration and
onboard the aircraft. These systems have a core applicable media storage and reproducing devices
hardware platform layer, a network layer, an oper- (video, audio and games).
Mahmood Ameen Vijay Rathnam
Vice President Projects Engineer,IFE programs
Emirates Engineering Projects Emirates Engineering Projects
Emirates,Dubai,UAE Emirates,Dubai,UAE
2 3
83TSAF
Performance
monitoring
of IFE systems
Proposals for the future from
Emirates Airline perspective
3
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE
Proposal ‘A’ expensive, unscheduled mainte- Based on these parameters, the second bus from CMEU2 to the
nance actions outside the main DMU performs several tasks, the DMU and a third bus from the
Link between IFE
base of the airline. In addition, the results of which are either found on EPESC to the DMU.
and ACMS ACMS is presently used for vari- DAR (Direct Access Recorder)
ous tasks such as hard landing cassettes, floppy disks (via MDDU The IFE servers shall regularly
detection, team proficiency moni- - Multi Disk Drive Unit), on the transmit various data such as seat
With the integration of modern, toring and trouble shooting at the MCDU (Multipurpose Control and operational mode (audio, video,
state-of-the-art technology such as system level. The main objective of Display Unit) screen or (if they are interactive modes), seatbox health
fly-by-wire or Full Authority ACMS is more preventative in downloaded via ACARS - Aircraft status, EADB (Enhanced Area
Digital Engine Control (FADEC), nature. Communication Addressing and Distribution Box) health status,
the complexity of aircraft systems Reporting System) directly on the handset operational status, over-
has led to the development of the The ACMS is organized around a ground support computer at the head health status, AVOD (Audio
Aircraft Condition Monitoring DMU (Data Management Unit, on airline ground station. ACMS gen- Video On Demand) availability
System (ACMS). The ACMS mon- A340-500 the FDIMU - Flight erates at least 21 reports, which status, CMEU availability status,
itors the data supplied by various Data Interface and Management include several standard reports AVOD storage device health sta-
aircraft systems for trend monitor- Unit), which interfaces with other and three user programmable tus, AVOD server health status,
ing to get maintenance relevant aircraft systems. Approximately reports. CMT (Cabin Management
data. This data enables the airline 13,000 parameters from 48 com- Terminal) health status, CTU
to customize their maintenance puters (via ARINC 429 data buses) PROPOSAL ‘A’ CONSISTS OF THE (Central Telecommunication Unit)
planning. Long-term trend moni- on the aircraft are fed into the FOLLOWING ELEMENTS health status, SATCOM (Satellite
toring of the engines and APU DMU. Communication Unit) availability
(Auxiliary Power Unit) prevents Connect the IFE main servers such status, seat reset status at least
as CMEU (Centralized Memoryand once every 30 minutes (this
Expansion Unit) and main process- should be customizable to an air-
ing LRUs (Line Replaceable Units) line’s specific needs) via ARINC
such as EPESC (Enhanced 429 buses to the DMU. In addi-
Passenger Entertainment System tion, software configuration data
Controller) via ARINC 429 bus to and database configuration are
the DMU.There shall be at least one sent once at the beginning of the
bus from CMEU 1 to the DMU, a flight to the DMU.
5
83TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE
5
83TSAF
100
80
0
30
0
29
91
0
16
31
61
0 ACMS - Data management function for proposal A
23
18
38
0
0
100
65
39
49
0
100
39
82
0
28
52
4
7
83TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE
The DMU processes all engineer- In addition to standard report trig- Proposal ‘B’ CMEU availability status, AVOD
ing data received from the IFE sys- gers for report <23>, means shall storage device health status,
Built-in condition
tem and generates IFE perfor- be provided to support user defin- AVOD server health status, CMT
mance/stability reports on ground, able triggers via the IFE database. monitoring health status, CTU health status,
at takeoff and every hour after take These user definable triggers are SATCOM availability status and
off, at TOC (Top Of Climb), at used to monitor specific events seat reset status at least once every
TOD (Top Of Descent), at touch such as AVOD stream failure, Instead of connecting the DMU 30 minutes (this should be cus-
down and upon arrival at the gate. CMEU server failure, and CMT via ARINC 429 data buses to core tomizable to an airline’s specific
failure to capture the overall IFE servers and processing units, needs) via internal buses to the
These reports are sent as IFE cabin IFE health conditions via this proposal necessitates fully IRM. In addition, software config-
Stability Report <23> either to the reports. certified software running as part uration data and database configu-
printer on arrival, to floppy disks on of the CMEU servers 1 and 2. ration are sent once at the begin-
MDDU or down linked automatical- In addition, the logic for the The core certified software is ning of the flight to the IRM.
ly via ACARS, Data-3, swift 64 or report<23> shall provide means to essentially ACMS report<23> IFE
BGAN (broad band), whichever is capture all commanded and com- Stability/Performance report re- The IRM processes all engineering
available and selected as the channel manded seat reset data along with hosted on CMEUs 1 and 2. data received from the IFE system
of communication by the airline. A pertinent UTC (Universal Time and generates the IFE
sample of such an IFE Stability Clock), data and seat location The algorithm and implementation Stability/Performance report on
report<23> is shown below. parameters. is certified as part of the core soft- ground, at takeoff and every hour
ware by the OEM (Airbus or after take off, at TOC, at TOD, at
Boeing as applicable) during the touch down and upon arrival at the
certification process. Once certi- gate. These reports are sent as IFE
fied, the IFE vendor cannot Stability report <23> either to the
modify these core algorithms. printer in flight, to floppy disks on
For further discussions, we shall MDDU or down linked automati-
call this software IRM (IFE Report cally via ACARS, Data-3, swift 64
Domain). or BGAN whichever is available
and selected as the channel of com-
The IFE servers regularlytransmit munication bythe airline. Asample
various data such as seat opera- of such an IFE Stability report<23>
tional mode (audio, video, interac- is shown previous page.
tive modes), seatbox health status,
EADB health status, handset oper- In addition to standard report
ational status, overhead health sta- triggers for report <23>, means
tus, AVOD availability status, shall be provided to support user
7
83TSAF
00
1166
3311
6611
00
2233
1188
3388
00
00
110000
6655
3399
4499
00
110000
3399
8822
00
2288
5522
Sample user
programmable triggers
Seat availability explanation
For example,the seat 10B may have a
status of FC,which translates into binary
values 11111100 and gives the following
IFE availability:
The status of each seatin the IFE stability report <23> is represented •Audio available
by two hexadecimal digits. •Video available
•AVOD available
•Games available
Audio Video AVOD Games Interactive Telephone Airshow Camera •Interactive available
•Telephone available
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 •Airshow NOT available
•Camera NOT available
10B
1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0
1means available, 0 means not available
6
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE
definable triggers via the IFE Software
database. These user definable
considerations in
triggers are used to monitor spe-
cific events such as AVOD stream airborne systems
failure, CMEU server failure, and
CMT failure to capture the overall
cabin IFE health conditions via Presently, ACMS software is clas-
reports. sified as Level D or Level E. Level
D is assigned to report generation
The logic for the report<23> shall software and Level E for the data
also provide means to capture all collection software. Report genera-
commanded and uncommanded tion software refers to standard
seat reset data along with pertinent reports such as the engine cruise
UTC, data and seat location report and cruise performance
parameters. report, which highly influence
engine performance warranty cal-
If critical changes have to be culations and scheduled mainte-
installed in the IRM domain, they nance. The IFE Stability report,
shall not be down linked bynormal which is a user definable report,
down load procedures used by IFE is classified under Level E. All
systems. Instead, these changes IFE software products onboard are
shall be approved by OEMs prior currently classified as Level E
to controlled installation on the systems based on DO-178B
CMEU servers. classifications.
83TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - PROPOSALS FOR THE FUTURE FROM EMIRATES AIRLINE PERSPECTIVE
Comparison of
the two proposals
PROPOSAL ‘A’ MERITS
Once certified, the ACMS software
architecture and its implementation
tend to be more stable. It has the
added advantage of rigorous control
by OEMs. The links to all other
peripherals (such a printer, MDDU,
ACARS and MCDUs) are already
established and implemented as part
of the ACMS system configuration.
PROPOSAL ‘B’ MERITS
No additional wiring between the
IFE and DMU is necessary.
Implementation is under the con-
trol of one vendor without involv-
ing the ACMS supplier.Integration
and testing are entirelybetween the
IFE vendor and OEM.
8 9
83TSAF
About the authors...
Mahmood AMEEN Vijay RATHNAM
Mahmood Ameen is currently head Vijay Rathnam is currently Projects
of the Cabin,IFE and Avionics Engineer in Emirates Engineering,
Engineering projects section at Dubai.He serves as a focal engineer
Emirates Airline where he serves as for IFE development for Emirates
Vice President of Engineering new fleet and also is responsible for
Projects.In his role,he oversees the the development of enhanced cabin
development of new IFE and Cabin lighting (mood lighting/star lighting)
systems for all of Emirates new fleet systems.Vijay,a US citizen,has
ofaircraft.He is also responsible for extensive experience in IFE industry
the in-house retrofit and and avionics systems (FMS,ACMS)
maintenance of cabin and IFE development.He holds a Bachelor of
systems in Emirates current fleet. Engineering (Electrical) from the
Mr.Ameen holds a Bachelor of University of Madras,and Master of
Science in Aeronautical Engineering Science in Computer Science from
from St Louis University,Missouri, the University of Texas,USA.
USA and Master of Science in
100
Air Transport Management from
80 Cranfield University,UK.
0
30
CONTACT DETAILS
0
29
Mahmood Ameen
91
Vice President
0
Emirates Engineering Projects
Emirates,Dubai,UAE
Tel:+97 14-2181415
Illustrations provided byEmirates Airline Fax:+97 14-2991299
16
mahmood.ameen@emirates.com
31
61
0 Vijay Rathnam
Projects Engineer,IFE programs
Emirates Engineering Projects
Emirates,Dubai,UAE
23 Tel:+ 97 14-2181000
18 Fax:+ 97 14-2991299
38 vijai.rathnam@emirates.com
0
Conclusion
0
100
65
Although a sample report is provided in monitoring enhancements proposed
39 this article, it could be further enhanced above to such systems to provide value
with additional parameters and formatting added IFE maintainability services both to
as deemed necessary.The interval for the an airline's maintenance control centre
49 report trigger and parameters to monitor and line maintenance teams
0 can be further refined.
100
With the enormous complexity of present
39
There are recent developments in the day IFE systems, it is critical for airlines to
industry to implement health-monitoring have a complete, comprehensive,
systems, which are aimed at remotely objective window into the performance of
82
collecting and monitoring aircraft data to IFE throughout the flight, at take off and at 0
28 determine the status of an aircraft's landing. These added tools will provide
52 current and future serviceability. There is the necessary mechanism to report with
potential to connect the IFE health confidence the performance of IFE.
9
TITLE - SUB-TITLE
83TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION FOR THE FUTURE
Performance monitoring
of IFE systems
Airbus vision for the future
CONTACT DETAILS
Marc Virilli
Head of Cabin
and Cargo Systems
Airbus Customer Services
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 46 41
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 25
marc.virilli@airbus.com
Conclusion
This approach is global for all systems Airbus. In the next issue of FAST
installed on Airbus aircraft and includes Magazine, we will share in more detail
IFE (In Flight Entertainment) systems. Airbus vision for the future for IFE
Both proposals in the previous article Systems trend monitoring and enhanced
from Emirates Airline arevery valid ones, maintenance processes using the
which in their principle complement aircraft as a major node of a network as
investigation paths under study in shown above.
10
83TSAF
THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED
*AIRMAN(Aircraft Maintenance Analysis) Aircraft Health Monitoring and Management has
is a real-time health monitoring and been a constant major subject for Airbus for some
troubleshooting solution developed by Airbus. years now and solutions for both raw OMS
AIRMAN constantly analyses the status
(Onboard Maintenance System) data acquisition
messages sent by aircraft systems and helps
such as BITE (Build In Test Equipment) and
airlines to optimize their maintenance and
troubleshoot their aircraft to: Marc Virilli ACMS (Aircraft Condition Monitoring System)
•Better anticipate possible aircraft technical plus on-ground processing (AIRMAN*) have been
events. developed and are available on all the Airbus cur-
•Improve their aircraft dispatch reliability.
rent product line. Enhancements of these systems
•Cut their maintenance and operational costs.
are implemented at the opportunity of each new
•Improve their maintenance task efficiency.
aircraft as well as new services aimed at improv- The A380
ing pro-active and predictive maintenance based
on performance monitoring and other state-of-
the-arttechnologies.
maintenance
programme is born!
A major success by all involved
On 23 December 2005, Airbus received accep- This article describes the way this milestone was
tance of the A380 Maintenance Review Board achieved thanks to the very active and dedicated
Report (MRBR) from the European Aviation involvement of hundreds of people from opera-
Safety Agency (EASA). This significant achieve- tors, authorities, suppliers and Airbus in the MRB
ment is one major step in the A380 scheduled process.
maintenance activity, but not the first, nor the last.
Christian Delmas Régis Broutee
Director Maintainability Director Maintenance Planning
and Maintenance Engineering &Services
Airbus Customer Services Airbus Customer Services
11
THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED
Lufthansa Technik was nominated
ISC chair by the operators panel,
Airbus co-chaired the ISC and
GSAC was nominated MRB chair
by the JAA.
The ISC also gave the A380 PPH
preliminary acceptance and vali-
dated the overall planning defini-
tion to help the first A380 operator
Singapore Airlines to get a CAAS
approved Operator Maintenance
Programme for EIS (Entry Into
Service). As a consequence, the
overall MRBR planning highlight-
ed the need for the first MPP sub-
mission to the MRBs for approval
12 months before EIS.
The ISC also defined the organi-
zation in charge of the develop-
ment of the MRBR, relying on
nine MWGs.
To ensure an optimized contribu-
tion from all ISC/MWG and MRB
participants, the ISC also set up an
intensive planning for training
sessions.
FEBRUARY TO JULY 2003:
THE TRAINING SESSIONS
AND A380 PPH APPROVAL
From February to July 2003,
Airbus Maintenance Engineering
organized five one-week training
sessions around the world with the
support of hosting customers,
Airbus Engineering and A380
Programme organizations. All in
all, more than 350 people from
customers, airworthiness authori-
ties, vendors and suppliers were
given a general familiarization of
the A380 design and trained on
the A380 PPH.
83TSAF
110000
8800
00
3300
The A380 MRBR Maintenance Engineering orga-
00
2299 nized three working sessions with
9911 the airworthiness authorities to
00 For more details on APPLICATION FOR THE finalize the preparation of the PPH
the MRB process
MAINTENANCE REVIEW BOARD before submission to the Industry
and ISC organization
see the article in PROCESS Steering Committee.
1166 FAST31 December 2002.
3311 In December 2000, Airbus official- The European JAA represented by
6611 lylaunched the A380 maintenance the GSAC (France), the LBA
00
programme. To meet certification (Germany), the CAA (UK) and
targets, Airbus must comply with also the FAA (USA) and the CASA
the JAR/FAR 25-1529 Instructions (AUS) contributed to the A380
2233 for Continued Airworthiness PPH preparation.
1188
applicable at that time. As the
3388
00 A380 Type Certification (TC) FEBRUARY 2003:
holder, Airbus must prepare, revise
THE FIRST INDUSTRY STEERING
as necessary and submit for
COMMITTEE
approval to the relevant airworthi-
00
ness authorities the initial mini- From 18 to 20 February 2003,
110000
6655 mum scheduled maintenance/ Airbus organized the first A380
3399 inspection requirements that are Industry Steering Commitee (ISC),
applicable to the A380 aircraft. whose responsibilities were:
• Toapprovethe A380 PPH.
4499 Just after the A380 first metal cut • To monitor the development
00 (Jan 2002), Airbus officially of the A380 MRBR and the
110000 applied for the Maintenance different Maintenance Working
3399
Review Board (MRB) process to Groups (MWG) activities.
the Joint Airworthiness Authorities • Tosubmit the A380
(JAA) in June 2002. At this time Maintenance Programme
8822
Airbus initiated an MRB process Proposal to the MRBs for
00
2288 compliant with: approval.
5522 • JAA OPS Administrative &
Guidance Material Section 2-
First ISC meeting participants
Part 2 – Chapter 16
• FAR 121 AC 121-22A
At the time of application, the
applicable Maintenance Steering
Group method was MSG3 Rev
2002.1. This is the revision that was
used to develop the A380 MRBR.
THE A380 POLICY AND
PROCEDURES HANDBOOK
From June to November 2002
Airbus Maintenance Engineering
developed the A380 Policy and
Procedures Handbook (PPH)
which, compared to the MSG3
document, provides additional
procedures, details, guidance,
interpretation of the rules, mainte-
nance interval selection, form
sheets, etc. necessaryfor analysis.
The PPH also provides detailed
work steps, responsibilities and
scheduling. Between November
2002 and January 2003, Airbus
12
83TSAF
Industry Steering Committee schedule
Airbus maintenance training sessions
13
15
83TSAF
THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED
This was not achieved by chance. Consequences
First of all, the active involvement
of the A380
of Airbus maintenance engineers in
the very early stages of the aircraft MRBR proposal
design development was essential.
acceptance versus
The A380 maintenance tasks inter-
val targets had been selected at the the MRBR approval
beginning of the ‘A3XX’ story,
well before it became the A380. All
through the concept and design Readers familiar with the MRB
phases of the A380 programme, Process may wonder why ‘MRBR
Airbus maintenance and design Proposal’acceptance is mentioned
engineers worked together to opti- instead of ‘MRBR approval’in this
mize scheduled and unscheduled article.
maintenance. Their target was to
offer an A380 with optimized According to the Instructions for
maintenance costs to operators, Continued Airworthiness (ICA)
while maintaining safety as the pri- JAR/FAR 25-1529, an approved
maryobjective. All design specifi- MRBR is required at the latest for
cations are defined so that the aircraft EIS. However, as agreed by
A380 design fulfils the initial the ISC the A380 MRBR planning
MRBR targets and also remains has been developed in such a way
compatible with future mainte- that enough time is provided to the
nance programme evolutions first operator to get approval for its
according to in-service experience. Operator Maintenance Programme
(OMP) by its local authorities.
All through the A380 design devel-
opment and the MRB process, Consequently, review of the MSG3
operators, airworthiness authorities analyses started in July 2003 based
and Airbus challenged each other, on the design known at that time.
contributing to the continuous Because of this and the numerous
improvement of the overall MRB design changes that typically hap-
process with the common objective pen during the design and flight
to offer the A380 with the most test phases, the MRBs were not in
appropriate maintenance pro- a position to approve a document
gramme to support a safe, reliable covering the aircraft EIS design
and economical aircraft operation. standard at this time.
This led to the development of very
thorough MSG3 analyses and the In addition, during the develop-
selection of the most appropriate ment and review of the MSG3
tasks and intervals. analyses by the MWGs, some
15
83TSAF
110000
8800
00
3300
JUNE 2003:
00 During Maintenance Task completion progress
2299 THE PPH APPROVAL
Working Groups
9911
00 In the mean time, thanks to the activities
lessons learned during the training
sessions, the PPH was updated and
1166 got its first approval by the ISC and
3311 acceptance by the MRBs in June
6611 2003. The major highlights of this
00
PPH are the aircraft yearly utiliza-
tion for medium/long haul routes.
2233 The A380 PPH becomes the
1188
industry benchmark in the opin-
3388
00 ion of the MRBs and operators
who report it as the best they have
ever seen.
00
110000 The MWG activity
6655
3399
From June 2003 to March 2005, the
The first A380
nine MWGs reviewed the MSG3
4499 analyses for A380 systems, struc- Maintenance
00 tures and zones selecting the most
110000 appropriate scheduled maintenance Programme
3399
tasks to ensure a safe, reliable and
Proposal (MPP)
economical aircraft operation.
8822
During this 21 month period,more Thanks to the efficient MSG3
00
than 900 MSG3 dossiers prepared analyses production and quality 2288
5522 byAirbus and major vendors main- monitoring process controlled by
tenance engineers, representing the the ISC, the initial target was met:
equivalent of more than 30,000 The A380 MPP is ready for review
MSG3 analysis pages (equivalent) and acceptance by the A380 ISC
were reviewed during 54 MWG in March 2005.
meetings from which close to
1,000 scheduled maintenance tasks During the tenth meeting in March
A380 PPH aircraft utilization assumptions
were selected. 2005 the ISC completed review of
the MWG results and concluded that
the selected scheduled maintenance
tasks and associated intervals are the
most appropriate ones. The ISC then
accepted the compiled MPP.
On 8 April 2005, some days prior to
the A380 maiden flight, the first
A380 MPP was submitted to the
MRBs for acceptance according to
the planning set up more than two
years earlier. Early involvement in
design phases and very active opera-
tor involvement were two key issues.
Most of the initial technical objec-
tives were met in the A380 MRBR
proposal, particularly the objec-
tives associated with task selection
and interval definition.
14
• In-service experience
(AD/CN, Service Bulletins
(SB), Service Information
Letters (SIL), All Operators
Telex (AOT)…)
The MPD provides additional
information for each sched-
uled maintenance task such
as, access, zones, source data,
preparation work, man hours,
elapsed time and reference to
the associated Aircraft
Maintenance Manual (AMM)
procedure.
Similar requirements for dif-
ferent sources are consolidat-
ed in the MPD at task and/or
Threshold/ Interval level.
At this stage of the A380 pro-
gramme, the MPD contains
only data coming from the
MRBR proposal.
ASIMPLIFIED MPD
WITH NEW FEATURES
Compared to other Airbus pro-
grammes, the A380 MPD is sim-
plified. Volume 2 is deleted as:
• The zoning and access
illustrations previously covered
in section 10 and 11 are
redundant with AMM Chapter
06 information.
• The illustrations of the Structure
Significant Items (SSI) from the
MRBR structures section,
previously covered in section 12
are now available in the relevant
AMM procedures.
With experience gained from other
Airbus programmes and in agree-
ment with the A380 ISC, a new
task numbering concept was intro-
duced to be self-explanatory and
remain compatible with future
maintenance programme and plan-
ning evolution. To assist operators
maintenance planning organiza-
tions, a new appendix for mainte-
nance planning is available. In this,
all MPD tasks whatever the source,
are packaged into maintenance
checks according to typical aircraft
operations.
17
83TSAF
THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED
17
83TSAF
• The ‘MRBR Proposal’will
Maintenance Planning Document on CD
be updated according to the
changes identified during the
March 2005 - June 2006 MWG
and ISC meetings and
submitted to the MRBs to
be approved prior to EIS.
This will become the first
A380 approved MRBR.
• The first A380 operator, at that
time, will only have to integrate
the changes in its OMP in order
to get approval from its local
airworthiness authority.
This agreement offers benefits:
• To the first A380 operator who
can anticipate their programme
and planning to minimize
workload just prior to EIS and
100
80 limit it to a programme revision.
0 • Toall A380 operators who
30 can prepare in advance their
maintenance programme and
assumptions on Flight Manual planning.
0
(FM) and Master Minimum • Tolocal authorities who have
29
Equipment List (MMEL) are contributed to the MRB process
91
0 made. These assumptions must be and can approvetheir operators
cleared for the MRBR approval. To OMP more quickly. New task numbering concept
protect the first A380 operator’s
interests an agreement is therefore
16 The A380
31 found between operators, MRBs
61 and Airbus: Maintenance
0 • The first MRBR will be called
Planning
‘MRBR proposal’and will not
be approved but accepted by the Document
23 EASA. It will thus be
18 recognized as an acceptable ASCHEDULED MAINTENANCE
38
0 basis by the first operators local DATA REPOSITORY
airworthiness authority for
approval of the first OMP. Parallel to the A380 MRB process,
• All design changes will be Airbus Maintenance Planning
0 analysed by Airbus maintenance organization prepared the A380 New appendix for maintenance planning
100
engineering for MSG3 analyses Maintenance Planning Document
65
update and review by the (MPD) with new and enhanced
39
relevant MWG prior to features. The MPD is a single ref-
submission of the MPP to erence for all repetitive tasks
the MRBR for approval. recommended by Airbus and is a
49
0 This process is a standard one non-approved document that con-
100 that remains applicable tains approved and non approved
39 throughout the aircraft life in scheduled maintenance require-
the MRBR revision process. ments from:
• All assumptions taken and • The MRBR
82 recorded during reviewof the • The Airworthiness
0
MSG3 analyses must be Limitation Items document
28
52 confirmed,if not, MSG3 (ALI)
analyses and MRBR must be • The Certification
reviewed and updated Maintenance Requirements
accordingly. document (CMR)
16
19
83TSAF
Conclusion
Amarvellous experience and a real team The A380 has not yet been delivered to its
spirit.The acceptance of the A380 MRBR first customer but the MRBR and the MPD
proposal by EASA is a major step in the have already switched from the
A380 maintenance programme development to the revision phase.
development. This was achieved thanks to
avery efficient ISC organization where Airbus Maintenance Planning organization
operators, airworthiness authorities, major has developed a specific assistance for
suppliers and Airbus joined efforts to give the Flight Test department. The A380 flight
the A380 a maintenance programme at test aircraft scheduled maintenance is
the same level as the aircraft: Areference already performed according to the A380
in the industry. MPD, customized to the aircraft definition
and operation.
Hundreds of thousands of working hours
have been invested in the A380 MRBR, Avery efficient result
more than 8,000 meeting man-days, more First technical evaluations of the A380
than 30,000 equivalent pages of maintenance programme, based on
documents prepared, reviewed and standard aircraft operation confirms that
validated by hundreds of people. All this the initial MRBR targets aremet:
was performed in a very professional and •An equivalent A check can be scheduled
very friendly atmosphere. every 750fh
•An equivalent C check can be
The result is that the A380 has a scheduled every 24 months/6,000fh
maintenance programme ready for •Structure inspections can be scheduled
implementation. The MPD provides the every 6 and 12 years
tools to help operators develop their
maintenance programme (OMP) get it This leads to significant maintenance
approved by their local airworthiness man-hours and maintenance cost savings
authority and prepare the associated A380 compared to aircraft with similar
maintenance schedule. Airbus operations.
Maintenance Planning Organization offers
customized services to help operators in
these activities.
19
83TSAF
THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED THE A380 MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME IS BORN! - AMAJOR SUCCESS BY ALL INVOLVED
100
80
0
30
ASIMPLIFIED MPD Next steps worthiness authorities to perform sions will combine source docu-
0
29 AVAILABLE IN MULTIPLE FORMATS the MSG3/SSA (System Safety ment revisions as much as possible
91 Assessment) compatibility check according to the different planning
As previously mentioned the A380
0 The A380 MPD and associated that leads to selection of the and document approvals.
MRBR Proposal acceptance by
features are available in multiple Certification Maintenance Requi-
EASA is the first major step in the
formats to meet operators expecta- rement (CMR) (compliance with
development of the A380 sched-
16 tions and provide an easy interface JAR/FAR 25-1309). As with the
uled maintenance documentation.
31 with their systems. MRBR development process, early
61 It was not the first one, and it will
involvement of Airbus maintenance
0 not be the last.
engineers during the design phases
is essential to reduce the number of
THE MRB PROCESS
CMRs to the minimum.
23
18 Following ISC, MRBs and Airbus
THE MPD
38
agreement, the A380 MRBR will
0
be updated according to design The A380 MPD will be revised
changes to obtain a formal approval every time one of the source docu-
CONTACT DETAILS
for EIS of the first aircraft. Then, ments is revised. To minimize the
0 once the A380 becomes an in ser- burden on operator’s maintenance Christian Delmas Régis Broutee
100 vice aircraft, the MRBR will fol- planning organizations, MPD revi- Director Maintainability Director Maintenance
65
low a standard revision process and Maintenance Engineering Planning & Services
39
Airbus Customer Services Airbus Customer Services
according to:
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 14 04 Tel:+33 (0)5 67 19 02 13
• Design changes
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 28 72 Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 22 78
• New regulations christian.delmas@airbus.com regis.broutee@airbus.com
49
• In-service experience feedback 0
100
39 For this, it is essential that from day
In particular, the AirN@v module one, A380 operators collect in
‘AirN@v / Planning’ offers the appropriate databases the results of
82 possibility to be 100% compatible the scheduled maintenance tasks
0 with the other AirN@v newgener- (findings and nil findings) to later
28
52 ation of technical data browsing supportMRBR evolution exercises.
tools, which are easy to use and
AirN@v module ‘AirN@v / Planning’
interactive (see article in FAST 35). THE AIRWORTHINESS
LIMITATION ITEM
The Airworthness Limitation Item
(ALI) process has also started with
the target to get the A380 ALI
document approved for the A380
type certification (compliance to
JAR/FAR 25-571).
A380 fatigue and damage toler-
ance evaluations will be performed
and associated scheduled mainte-
nance requirements will be pub-
lished in the A380 document at
type certification. The ALI will
later be updated once results from
the fatigue test cell are available.
THE CERTIFICATION MAINTENANCE
REQUIREMENT
The process has also started. Two
Certification Maintenance Coordi-
nation Committee meetings have
taken place with operators and air-
18
21
83TSAF
HYPOXIA - AN INVISIBLE ENEMY - CABIN DEPRESSURIZATION EFFECTS ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY HYPOXIA - AN INVISIBLE ENEMY - CABIN DEPRESSURIZATION EFFECTS ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
Operating at high altitude without system. She decided not to use the
Human physiology
adequate understanding, training portable oxygen equipment and
or equipment protection can be went straight to the flight deck. Within the lungs the alveola provide the interface between
dangerous as shown by the follow- Before being able to assist the air and blood.The blood which is returned from the body
tissue into the alveolae has given away most of its oxygen
ing extracts from two accident captain she collapsed onto the
so that the oxygen partial pressure in the lungs is higher
reports: floor. Once again, the first officer
than in the arriving blood.A process of diffusion then
attempted to put on the oxygen drives oxygen through the thin alveolar wall into the blood.
‘One of the first encounters with mask for the captain, this time
the dangers of high altitude flight successfully. Soon afterward, the
was reported in 1862 when a bal- captain regained consciousness
loon flight was made to study the and was unaware he had been
effects of low ambient pressure. unconscious, which is a typical
The balloon ascended to approxi- reaction from a victim of hypoxia.’
mately 29,000ft and during the
flight a series of “strange” symp-
toms, notably loss of visual and The hypoxia
hearing capability, paralysis of
effects of
arms and legs, and finally, uncon-
sciousness occurred. The team a quick cabin
could have been lost, but was
depressurization
saved by one member pulling the
balloon valve rope with his teeth
(his arms were already paral- During a quick depressurization
ysed), to descend the balloon. The the partial pressure of oxygen in
team recovered as the balloon the lungs/alveolae reduces rapidly
descended, but this marked for the with the effect of reverse diffusion.
first time the risk of low ambient This means that once the oxygen
pressure.’ partial pressure in the alveolae has
reached a level that is below the
‘In 1998 a decompression incident level in the blood, the blood oxy-
occurred on an aircraft at gen moves out of the body back The most important parameters for the oxygen diffusion
35,000ft. Both the captain and the into the ambient air. This effect of process are the oxygen percentage and barometric
ambient pressure.Changing these parameters changes
first officer had received altitude- reverse diffusion unfortunately fur-
immediately the oxygen saturation level in blood and with
chamber training during their pre- ther reduces the already verylimit-
it the oxygen supply to the bodytissue.Unfortunately,
vious military careers and knew ed oxygen storing capability of there is no significant storage of oxygen in the human
about the effects of low cabin blood and supports hypoxia effects. body,unlike many other chemical substances necessary
to maintain life.The blood is the only storehouse for pressure. The first officer attempt- Holding of breath cannot stop the
oxygen,and its capacity is very limited.Hence,the
ed to control the cabin rate of reverse flow since the pulmonary
human body lives only a hand-to-mouth existence with
climb by switching to the standby gas expansion would lead to seri- its oxygen supply.
pressurization system. When use ous lung injury.
As the pressure of air in the atmosphere decreases with
of the standby system failed to increasing altitude,the partial pressure of oxygen in the
improve the situation, he donned Severe hypoxia caused by a signif- air reduces and with it the diffusion of oxygen into the
body.Reduction of oxygen availability in the body results his oxygen mask. The captain, who icant reduction in cabin pressure is
in loss of functions ranging from slight impairment up to had been talking with a passenger very dangerous for flight crew
death.It is the nervous system,in particular in the higher
who was visiting the flight deck, because: centres of the brain,and the eyes which have a high
attempted to don his oxygen mask • The victims of hypoxia rarely metabolism with no oxygen reserve.These are most
sensitive to oxygen depletion and therefore are the first too,but in doing so he knocked his notice that theyare about to
to be affected by a reduced oxygen supply. glasses to the floor. When trying to pass out.
retrieve them he lost conscious- • Usually there is quickly a loss For healthy persons altitude exposure up to 15,000ft is
usually not hazardous since cardiovascular and
ness and slumped forward. The of critical judgment
respiratorycompensatorymechanisms (faster breathing
first officer attempted to help the • Most victims often experience a and increased pulse rate/blood circulation) act to
captain but was unable to do this, mildly euphoric state maintain adequate oxygenation at the cellular level.
so initiated a descent to 25,000ft. • Thinking is slowed, muscular
The effects of reduced oxygen supply to the body
A short time later the first officer coordination is impaired (hypoxia) vary between persons,depending on health,
asked the senior flight attendant physical fitness,age,activity level and statistical scatter
with the population.Pilots and flight attendants usually
to assist the captain. To enter the The only effective means of
require more oxygen during an emergency than healthy,
flight deck the flight attendant had protection is the quick donning of
seated passengers and might therefore suffer earlier
to remove her oxygen mask con- oxygen masks as the first action - from hypoxia effects.
nected to the fixed cabin oxygen before troubleshooting!
21
83TSAF
GENERAL BLOOD CIRCULATION
Hypoxia
An invisible enemy
Cabin depressurization effects
on human physiology
DEFINITIONS OF HYPOXIA When public air transportation first became
commonly available, flights did not reach alti-
Hypoxia is separated into four types: tudes that represented a significant risk of
• Hypoxic hypoxiais a condition caused by reduced
reduced oxygen supply - called hypoxia - to
barometric pressure,affecting the body's ability to
either passengers or crew. However, in the late transfer oxygen from the lungs to the
bloodstream. 1940s and 1950s aircraft were developed that
• Histotoxic hypoxiacan be induced by the allowed safe transport of the flying public at
introduction of substances like alcohol or drugs altitudes around 40,000ft, which have remained
into tissue,reducing its ability to accept oxygen
relativelyconstant since then. from the bloodstream.
• Hypaemic hypoxia(or anaemic hypoxia)is a result
of the blood being unable to carryoxygen,e.g.
caused by exposure to carbon monoxide.
• Stagnant hypoxiaresults from the body's
inability to carry oxygen to the brain,which can
result from high gravity-forces causing blood to
pool in the lower extremities of the body.
Hartwig Asshauer
Certification Manager
Hydro-Mechanical & Air Systems
Airbus Engineering
20
HYPOXIA - AN INVISIBLE ENEMY - CABIN DEPRESSURIZATION EFFECTS ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
Oxygen One means to increase oxygen par-
tial pressure is to increase the oxy-
partial pressure
gen concentration in breathing air.
At 40,000ft cabin altitude an oxy-
The concentration of oxygen in the gen partial pressure of maximum
atmosphere is constant at 20.95% 188mbar can be achieved by
at altitudes up to 100,000ft, which breathing pure oxygen (100% oxy-
means that according to Dalton's gen concentration without over-
Law* the oxygen partial pressure pressure).
at sea level is 212mbar (20.95% of
1013mbar where 1013mbar is the Another additional means for
standard atmospheric pressure at hypoxia protection is positive
sea level). pressure breathing, which is usu-
ally found in modern crew oxy-
As altitude increases above sea gen masks and means the delivery
level the partial pressure of the of pure oxygen under pressure
component gases decreases consis- into the respiratory tract. For civil
tent with the decrease in total applications positive pressure
atmospheric pressure. For exam- breathing is able to increase addi-
ple, the partial pressure of oxygen tionally the oxygen partial pres-
at 40,000ft is reduced to 39mbar sure by around 20 to 30mbar
only, which is far too inadequate to provided that the overpressure
support human metabolism. condition is limited to some min-
utes only. This means that at
40,000ft it requires 100% oxygen
concentration of the breathing gas
combined with positive pressure
breathing to achieve sea level
equivalent conditions. Positive
pressure breathing requires some
training and is tiring and inconve-
nient, which is the rationale for
having so far provided this pro-
tection feature to flight crew only
(for short time use only).
83TSAF
0
0
100
65
39
*Dalton’s Law Time of Useful Time of Safe
49(1 766 -1844)
0In1801,the English astronomer Consciousness Unconsciousness
10a0n d chemist,John Dalton,
39d iscovered the pressure
relationship among gases in a In the 'World of Hypoxia' the Time Some experts believe that for pas-
mixture.Dalton's Law states that of Useful Consciousness (TUC) is sengers - in contradiction to the
82 the pressure exerted by a mixture a very important parameter. For flight crew - a short period of
of gases is equal to the sum of
0 low ambient pressure conditions it unconsciousness during cabin
the pressures that each would
28 exert if it alone occupied the indicates the time available to per- depressurization can be tolerated 52
space filled by the mixture. form purposeful activities, such as since they are not performing an
oxygen mask donning or aircraft operational task. Unconsciousness
control. Beyond this time frame is a clear sign of insufficient oxy-
mental and physical capabilities gen supply to the brain and it is
are dangerously impaired and obvious that this time can only be
finally result in unconsciousness very short before permanent brain
and potentially death. damage occurs. So far, it has not
been possible to associate a specif-
As shown in the table on the right, ic time frame for the safe time of
TUC is negatively correlated with unconsciousness.
altitude.It is important to note that
even if activities are performed The uncertainties in extrapolation
within the TUC time frame there is of animal data and the wide vari-
a significant deterioration of work ability in individual tolerances
rate and mental capability,which is have so far prevented determina-
correlated with the time spent at low tion of a commonly agreed value
Á Early type of shaped pressure conditions (at the end of for Time of Safe Unconsciousness
oxygen mask for passengers the TUC time frame, performance is (TSU) among human physiology
much lower than at the beginning). experts. It is believed that a safe
time of unconsciousness is some-
The TUC is the 'Window of where between 90 seconds and
Opportunity' for donning an oxy- 4minutes.
gen mask and can be very limited
so must take overriding precedence
over any other activities.
Á Current oxygen mask for passengers
Í
22 23
83TSAF
HYPOXIA - AN INVISIBLE ENEMY - CABIN DEPRESSURIZATION EFFECTS ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
Time of Useful Consciousness
20,000ft All unacclimatized persons
lose useful consciousness
within 10 minutes
25,000ft Useful consciousness is lost
after 2.5minutes or less
30,000ft TUC:approx.30 seconds
37,000ft TUC:approx.18 seconds
45,000ft TUC:approx.15 seconds
These data on TUC are averaged
values based on tests with healthy
individuals when breathing ambient air
(no supplemental oxygen provided).
Alarge individual variation in the effects of
hypoxia has been found.There is evidence
that TUC is shorter for people exposed to
stress conditions.
Mask straps inflated Mask in place
Í Í
23
Ë Flight crew oxygen mask *
* Manufacturer EROS
HYPOXIA - AN INVISIBLE ENEMY - CABIN DEPRESSURIZATION EFFECTS ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
25
83TSAF
HYPOXIA - AN INVISIBLE ENEMY - CABIN DEPRESSURIZATION EFFECTS ON HUMAN PHYSIOLOGY
Airworthiness
requirements
The Airworthiness authorities have
identified the risk of hypoxia and
have created requirements (see
table on the left).
Also, after an accident in the USA
the FAA initiated a Special
Certification Review (SCR) on
pressurization systems. The SCR
recommends that the aircraft flight
manual (for aircraft certified for
flights above 25,000ft) require in
the emergency procedures the
donning of oxygen masks as the
first crew action after a cabin
altitude warning.
This highlights again the impor-
tance of immediate donning of
oxygen masks when cabin depres-
surization occurs.
CONTACT DETAILS
Hartwig Asshauer
Certification Manager
Hydro-Mechanical
&Air Systems
Airbus Engineering
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 04 98
Conclusion Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 31 55
hartwig.asshauer@airbus.com
The first step for any flight crew member passengers that wereunable to protect
faced with cabin depressurization should themselves against hypoxia by using the
be the immediate donning of an oxygen passenger oxygen masks provided.
mask. Any delay in donning a mask will Severehypoxia is very dangerous for
significantly increase the risk of losing unprotected passengers and requires a
consciousness before cabin pressure is quick return to an adequate cabin
regained. Severe hypoxia leads usually to pressure or where not possible (above
the loss of critical judgement combined high terrain), it requires a check by the
with a mildly euphoric state, which makes flight attendants that the passenger
hypoxia very dangerous for flight crew. oxygen masks arecorrectly used.
This is highlighted also in the FAA Special
Certification Review that was issued some For a long time transport aircraft have
years ago on the effects of cabin been equipped with oxygen systems for
depressurization. flight crew and passengers that provide an
adequate protection against hypoxia. As
Moreover, in case of rapid cabin long as these oxygen systems are used
depressurization a quickly accomplished according to their simple procedures the
emergency descent is often the only invisible enemy hypoxia poses little
means of fast re-oxygenation of danger to flight crews and passengers.
25
83TSAF
0
0
100
65
39
Effect on human physiology of moderate cabin altitude
49
0
100 Very large numbers of aircrew and passengers have been exposed to breathing air at cabin altitudes up
39 to 8,000ft over the last 60 years without significant deleterious effects.Although exposure to this altitude
reduces the oxygen partial pressure in the pulmonary tract the tissues of the body are maintained well
above the required level.
82
Some airlines still allow smoking in the aircraft cabin,which results in carbon monoxide inhalation with
0
the smoke.Carbon monoxide has a 240-times greater tendency than oxygen to attach to red blood
28 haemoglobin,thus inactivating a large amount of haemoglobin as an oxygen carrier.It has been found that
52
the hypoxia effects from carbon monoxide and altitude are additive; hence chronic smokers are at a
higher equivalent altitude than non-smokers in terms of blood oxygen supply.
Also,alcohol poisons body tissues in such a manner that they cannot use oxygen properly.Usually,it is
noticed by passengers that the physiological effect of alcohol consumed during flight is more intense than
atsea level,which is due to the additive hypoxia effects of alcohol and altitude.
Oxygen equipment For flight crew there are usually
quick donning oxygen masks
on civil aircraft
installed, which can be donned
with one hand in less than 5 sec-
On modern aircraft oxygen equip- onds. The mask straps are com-
ment is installed to provide ade- bined with elastic tubes that
quate protection against the dam- inflate and stiffen when the mask
aging effects of hypoxia in case of is taken from its stowage, allow-
cabin depressurization: ing the mask to be easily put over
the head with one hand. Once the
grip on the mask is released, the
Extract of the prime requirements tubes deflate and their elastic
characteristics ensure a perfect fit.
GENERAL The required oxygen concentra-
•CS/FAR 25.841 (a):Maximum cabin pressure altitude under normal operation:8,000ft tion of the breathing air is auto-
•CS/FAR 25.841 (a): Maximum cabin pressure altitude after any probable failure condition in the
matically adapted to the cabin
pressurization system:15,000ft
pressure. •FAR 25.841 (a) (2) (i):Maximum exposure time to cabin pressure altitude exceeding
25,000ft:2minutes
For the passenger oxygen supply
•FAR 25.841 (a) (2) (ii):Exposure to cabin pressure altitude that exceeds 40,000ft:Not allowed
the continuous flow concept is
CABIN OCCUPANTS used on all Airbus aircraft.
•CS/FAR 25.1443 (c):Provides oxygen system performance data on oxygen flowand Oxygen is delivered continuously
required partial pressure of oxygen to an expandable oxygen bag
•CS/FAR 25.1447 (c) (1):The total number of masks in the cabin must exceed the number where it is conserved during exha-
of seats by at least 10% lation, so it is available during the
•CS/FAR 25.1443 (d):Defines oxygen flow for first-aid oxygen equipment (for cabin next inhalation to supplement the
depressurization treatment)
steady oxygen flow.
•JAR OPS 1.760/FAR 121.333 (e) (3):Requires first-aid oxygen for at least 2% of
passengers
It was decided at an early stage in
•JAR OPS 1.770 (b) (2) (i)/FAR 121.329 (c):Defines the percentage of passengers that need
passenger oxygen mask develop-
to be provided with supplemental oxygen (cabin pressure altitude dependent)
ment that the untrained civilian
FLIGHT CREW population should not be expected
•CS/FAR 25.1443 (a) & (b):Provides oxygen system performance data on oxygen flow and to recognize the correct orienta-
required partial pressure of oxygen tion for a shaped mask, and it was
•CS/FAR 25.1447 (c) (2) (i):For aircraft operating above 25,000ft quick donning oxygen required that a mask should be
masks are required for the flight crew which can be donned with one hand within 5 operable in any position in which
seconds it might be donned by the user.
•FAR 121.333 (c) (2) (i) (A):One flight crew member needs to wear permanently his oxygen
A second basic requirement was
mask when the aircraft is operated above FL410
a universal size, which finally
•FAR 121.333 (c) (3):In case one flight crew member leaves the controls the remaining pilot
defined the well-known cylindri-
needs to use his oxygen mask when the aircraft is operated above 25,000ft
cal mask body.
24
Fuel Quantity level. In some cases the probe will
over-read or 'disagree' with a
Indication System
neighbouring reading.
The Fuel Quantity Indication At aircraft level on the flight deck
System (FQIS) measures the quan- a key symptom of severe fuel
tity of fuel in each of the aircraft contamination is FQI fluctuation
fuel tanks. The FQIS provides this during flight, or degraded FQI
information to the flight deck pro- indication.
viding a display of the Fuel on
Board (FOB) and, via the ECAM
(Electronic Centralized Aircraft
Monitor) systems page, the indi-
vidual tank quantities. On the
A300/A310 and A330/A340 fleets
the data is used in the auto-transfer
functions e.g. CG (Centre of
Gravity) control.
Airbus aircraft utilize capacitance
to measure the level (volume) of
fuel within the aircraft fuel tanks.
Vertical probes located through-
out the tanks measure the fuel
level in the tanks. Each probe has
two concentric aluminium tubes.
The open ends of the tubes allow
the fuel to move freely up and
between the tubes. The capaci-
tance value of the probe changes
in proportion to the depth of fuel
within the tank. When the probe is
dry the capacitance value is low,
but as fuel moves up the probe the
capacitance value increases. Fuel
density is measured for example
using the fuel dielectric value or In some cases aircraft dispatch
variations with the speed of may be limited by the status of the
sound. The FQIS uses the volume FQI display (please refer to the
and density values to calculate the MMEL).
mass (kg or lb).
Symptoms and
The effect of
prevention
microbiological
contamination on Operators are encouraged to focus
on prevention of microbiological
an aircraft FQIS
fuel contamination to avoid
the penalties associated with
The probes and downstream calcu- occurrences. The bacteria causing
lations are calibrated for use in jet such contamination live within the
fuel. The probes measure from water/fuel interface and these liv-
'unusable' to full tank capacity. ing organisms enter either via the
However, when the fuel is contam- fuel supply or are airborne.
inated the fuel characteristics However, to live and develop with-
change. The probes may also in the tank the bacteria require
become contaminated. Typically, water (for oxygen). Therefore, the
the probes will now read a higher first consideration in prevention is
capacitance level than the real fuel minimizing water content in the
27
83TSAF
FUEL CONTAMINATION - PREVENTION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIONS FUEL CONTAMINATION - PREVENTION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIONS
Degraded indication on the
ECAM
27
83TSAF
Fuel
contamination
Prevention and
maintenance actions
Airbus continues to focus on optimizing aircraft Airbus has for many years worked with our part-
availability and a key issue is the availability of ners in IATA (International Air Transport
the Aircraft Fuel Quantity Indication System Association) on this issue. This work culminated
(FQIS). Within the industry the major threat to the in publication of the IATA Guidance Material on
FQIS availability is microbiological contamina- Fuel Contamination, which summarized the sci-
tion of the fuel. Such contamination will impact ence behind contamination and collated the best
the FQIS readings, typically driving the FQIS recommendations from the OEMs (Original
probe readings out of limit. If left untreated, con- Equipment Manufacturers), operators and
tamination can also generate acids in the fuel microbiologists.
tanks, which may attack the wing tank structure.
Airbus continues to develop recommendations
based on operator feedback and this article sum-
marizes current knowledge on prevention and
maintenance actions.
Christopher McGregor
Group Manager Fuel Systems
Airbus Customer Services
26
fuel tank system. All modern civil evident to the naked eye. Any
aircraft incorporate water drainage 'cloudiness' in either fluid indicates
and/or scavenge systems to help possible contamination and action
achieve this. The Airbus wing is required.
design ensures water is maintained
in suspension and fed to the Currently, Airbus recommends an
engines; any remaining water is annual analysis of fuel from each
then drained at regular intervals aircraft to test for fuel/water cont-
via the water drain valves. The amination, which should be con-
water drainage interval for each sidered a minimum for all opera-
Airbus aircraft programme is tors. However, each individual
detailed in its Maintenance operator needs to assess their risk
Planning Document (MPD). levels, especially their experience
at aircraft and fuel supply level
A second key element of preven- and define their testing require-
tion is monitoring. Often over- ments accordingly as an annual
looked is the need to visually test may not be sufficient in some
inspect any water resulting from circumstances.
the MPD water drain task. Drained
water and fuel will separate within There are a number of fuel contam-
the container with the water ination test kits available in the
settling to the bottom. Both should market place, each with advantages
be clear with no particulates and disadvantages. The main issue
with all test kits is that they cannot
be used as a single snapshot to pro-
vide a detailed analysis of tank con-
ditions. However, they can be used
effectively to create a baseline for
operation from which an increase
in contamination can be observed
and the appropriate action taken.
In summary, the key indicators of
fuel contamination are particulates
observed in drained water, results
from the fuel analysis or FQI fluc-
tuations, or degradation observed
on the flight deck. If no action is
taken and these symptoms are
ignored engine main filter clog
events can be anticipated.
Maintenance
actions
In all cases operators are recom-
mended to include contamination
prevention in their maintenance
programme. Based on the previous
explanation the most important
tasks are water drainage and fuel
monitoring.
Another possibility is sharing
the common objectiveof prevention
with an operators fuel supply
company. Currently there are no
requirements for fuel supply com-
29
83TSAF
0
FUEL CONTAMINATION - PREVENTION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIONS FFUUEELL CCOONNTTAAMMIINNAATTIIOONN -- PPRREEVVEENNTTIIOONN AANNDD MMAAIINNTTEENNAANNCCEE AACCTTIIOONNSS
23
18
38
0
0 1) Get a fuel sample Microbial growth
100 2) Use a biological test kit inspection and maintenance
actions
65
39
•Low level of bio contamination Low
requires regularmonitoring Level of contamination?
49
(within 1 to 12 months)
0
100 High or moderate
39
•Do the microbiological detection test
•Repeat the bio contamination test again in 10 days, but after at least 5flights.
within 10 days Take corrective action if necessary
82
0
28
52
Low
Level of contamination? •Within 10 days apply biocide to all fuel tanks
as per AMM 28-11-00 Page Block 301
In-tank observation of
High
microbiological fuel
contamination:
fuel contamination attached to
•Within 10 days en,ter the fuel tank for inspection
the tank structure
••PPhhyyssiiccaallllyy rreemmoovvee mmiiccrroobbiioollooggiiccaall ddeeppoossiittss
aass ppeerr AAMMMM 2288--1111--0000 PPaaggee BBlloocckk 330011
panies or distributors to test for to be burnt by the engines and
microbiological fuel contamination. avoid operators disposing of the
treated fuel.
In these discussions we refer oper-
ators to the JIG (Joint Inspection Airbus recommends metered injec-
Group). Under the IATA umbrella tion of the biocides to ensure ade-
airport facilities are audited and quate mixing within the fuel. The
actions taken to maintain the qual- biocides are not effective at low
ity of the fuel supply. temperatures hence the soak time
defined in the AMM cannot
If fuel contamination is detected, the include flight time.
industry has developed the follow-
ing guidance and recommendations. If tank contamination is severe the
This flow-chart will be integrated biocides will only kill the outer
into all Airbus aircraft AMMs layer of bacteria attached to the tank
(Aircraft Maintenance Manuals). It and probe surfaces. Therefore, as
is difficult to provide a single rec- per the flowchart, tank entry and
ommendation to cover all scenarios cleaning is recommended to remove
but the flow-chart does summarize all visible traces of contamination.
very well the thought process and The time, schedule disruption and
objective of avoiding fuel tank entry cost of tank entryis well understood
if at all possible. and appreciated by Airbus. Hence,
the need to focus on prevention to
Currently within the industry two avoid this financial impact is cru-
biocides are approved for aviation cial. If a decision is taken to enter a
use. The maximum concentrations tank, Airbus recommends a thor-
are defined in the Airbus AMMs ough cleaning of it. The pressure to
and are a compromise between the return an aircraft to service is well
effectiveness of the biocide and the understood,but if a tank is not thor-
maximum concentration allowed oughly cleaned there is a significant
by the engine and APU (Auxiliary risk of contamination developing
Power Unit) manufacturers. These again requiring additional future
concentrations allow treated fuel maintenance action.
29
83TSAF
28
FUEL CONTAMINATION - PREVENTION AND MAINTENANCE ACTIONS FUEL CONTAMINATION - PART II
83TSAF
0
23
18
38
0
Developments Report) entry and hence changes
0 require airworthiness authority
100 The current recommendations on input and approval.
65
prevention and maintenance tasks
39
have taken many years to develop For the A330/A340 Family an
and Airbus recognizes the efforts activity is launched to study reduc-
and expertise of our partners in ing the impact of contamination on
49
IATA. As a result, today there is the FQI.
0
100 much more advice and guidance
39 available at aircraft and fuel supply Airbus also intends to study new
level than ever before. and more effective biocides, which
are available in the market place,
82 For the future Airbus will continue but not currently approved within
0
to look at ways of reducing the the aviation industry. Biocide
28
associated maintenance burden. approval however is a long lead-
52
time item requiring primarily
For the A320 and A330/A340 engine manufacturer approval.
families of aircraft engineering There are also significant health and
action has been launched to further safety issues to consider. Further
develop the water management information on this initiative will be
systems within the aircraft. announced when available.
The objective is to enhance the
water scavenge efficiency and at a
later date extend the water drainage
interval; this is a MRBR
(Maintenance Review Board
FURTHER READING
Airbus Documentation CONTACT DETAILS
SIL 28-079 • AMM 12-32-28 • AMM 28-11-00 • MPD 28-11-00
Key partners Christopher McGregor
ECHA MICROBIOLOGY www.echamicrobiology.co.uk Group Manager
CONIDIABIOSCIENCE www.conidia.com Fuel Systems
MERCK www.microbiology.merck.de Airbus Customer Services
TANK TIGERS www.aoginc.com Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 76 02
TANK DEVILS www.tankdevils.com Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 25
christopher.mcgregor@airbus.com
Conclusion
Prevention is the key to avoiding analysis or FQI fluctuations or degradation
microbiological fuel contamination. observed on the flight deck.
Water drainage and fuel sample analysis
arethe critical tasks at aircraft level. Operators arerecommended to consult the
All fuel contains a background level of IATA Guidance Material on Microbiological
bacteria, so minimizing water content Contamination in Aircraft Fuel Tanks for
within the aircraft fuel tanks will significantly assistance in planning contamination
reduce the risk of contamination prevention tasks. In addition please consult
developing within the tanks. In the long Airbus Service Information Letter 28-079.
term, preventing contamination will reduce Success against contamination requires
the future potential for structural corrosion long-term industrial co-operation. Within
and damage to in-tank components. the IATA framework Airbus will continue to
Again, the key indicators of fuel work with industry partners to combat fuel
contamination are particulates observed contamination and optimize prevention and
in drained water, results from the fuel maintenance practices.
30
83TSAF
31
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VPCustomer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Thorsten Eckhoff
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3463 Customer Support Centres
Training centres
CHINA Spares centres / Regional warehouses
Peter Tiarks Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
General Manager Customer Support RCSM location Country RCSM location Country
Tel: +86 10 804 86161 Ext. 5040
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63 Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates London United Kingdom
Ajaccio France Louisville United States of America
Algiers Algeria Luton United Kingdom
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT Al-Manamah Bahrain Macau S.A.R. China
ADMINISTRATION Alma-Ata Kazakhstan Madrid Spain
Jean-Philippe Guillon Amman Jordan Manchester United Kingdom
Amsterdam Netherlands Manila Philippines
Director Athens Greece Mauritius Mauritius
Resident Customer SupportAdministration Auckland New Zealand Memphis United States of America
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02 Baku Azerbaijan Mexico City Mexico
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei Miami United States of America
Bangalore India Milan Italy
Bangkok Thailand Minneapolis United States of America
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Barcelona Spain Montreal Canada
Airbus has its main spares centre in Hamburg, Beirut Lebanon Moscow Russia
and regional warehouses in Frankfurt, B B e ru rl s in sels G Be e l r g m iu a m ny M Na u n m c b h a a i ng I C n h d i i n a a
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Buenos Aires Argentina Nanjing China
Cairo Egypt New York United States of America
Airbus operates 24 hours a dayevery day. Casablanca Morocco Newcastle Australia
AOG Technical and Spares calls. C C h h a e r n lo g t d t u e U C n h i i t n e a d States of America N Pa o l u m m a e d a e Mallorca N Sp e a w in Caledonia
Cologne Germany Paris France
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Colombo Sri Lanka Paro Bhutan
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Copenhagen Denmark Phoenix United States of America
Dalian China Pittsburgh United States of America
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Damascus Syria Prague Czech Republic
support.airtac@airbus.com Delhi India Qingdao China
Denver United States of America Quito Ecuador
Spares AOGs in North America should be Detroit United States of America Rome Italy
Dhaka Bangladesh San’a Yemen
addressed to: Doha Qatar San Francisco United States of America
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Donetsk Ukraine San Salvador El Salvador
Fax:+1 (703) 729 4373 Dubai United Arab Emirates Santiago Chile
Dublin Ireland Sao Paulo Brazil
Dusseldorf Germany Seoul South Korea
Spares AOGs outside North America Fort Lauderdale United States of America Shanghai China
should be addressed to: Frankfurt Germany Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 3001/3002/3003 Guangzhou China Shenyang China
Fax:+49 (40) 50 76 3011/3012/3013 H H a a i m ko b u urg G Ch e i r n m a any S S h in e g n a z p h o e r n e C Si h n i g n a a pore
Hangzhou China Sydney Australia
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Hanoi Vietnam Taipei Taiwan
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Helsinki Finland Tashkent Uzbekistan
Hong Kong S.A.R. China Tehran Iran
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Indianapolis United States of America Tokyo Japan
Istanbul Turkey Toulouse France
Airbus Training subsidiaries Izmir Turkey Tulsa United States of America
Miami, USA - Florida Jakarta Indonesia Tunis Tunisia
Johannesburg South Africa Varna Bulgaria
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Karachi Pakistan Vienna Austria
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Kita-Kyushu Japan Washington United States of America
Beijing, China Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Wuhan China
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 K La u r w na a c it a city C Ku yp w r a u i s t X Z i u 'a ri n ch S C w hi i n tz a erland
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 Lisbon Portugal
83TSAF
32
www.airbus.com
The Airbus A380 is leaps ahead. Surpassing current levels of efficiency and
with state-of-the-art cabin design, it embodies 30 years of non-stop innovation.
Airbus, setting the standards.
.skramedartderetsigererasemantcudorpdnaogolsti,subriA
One giant leap.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
8
3
T
S
A
F
38
J U L Y 2 0 0 6
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
