T
S
E
G
I
D
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
4
3
T
S
A
F
34
J U L Y 2 0 0 4
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
This issue of FAST marks the end of an era - it is the last FAST which will Denis Dempster,
be produced under the guidance of our editor Denis Dempster. Denis, who is Agnès Massol-Lacombe
retiring in the summer, has been FAST editor almost since the beginning, taking and Kenneth Johnson
over from the third issue. His first issue of FAST was in 1984, when Airbus had
only the A300 and A310 aircraft in service. Since then, the A320 and A330/A340
aircraft families have gone into service, with a resulting increase of articles
covering their advanced technology. Denis has seen FAST through the expansion
of the Airbus family and the ups and downs of our industry. He has unfailingly
produced excellent, informative and well received articles, which is confirmed
by the results of the survey enclosed in FAST 33. These results give very high
scores for the level of content, readability, attractiveness and quality of FAST.
Denis brought exceptional abilities, patience and humour to FAST and he will
be sorely missed, but after 49 years in the industry, his retirement is well earned,
so my colleagues and I here in Airbus would like to thank him for his
exceptional work and wish him well in his retirement. I feel confident that you,
the readers of his work over the past 20 years, will feel the same and therefore
we will wish him well on your behalf.
We are fortunate that Agnès Massol-Lacombe, who is the art director of FAST
and has worked on it since the beginning, will carry on with us to provide
continuity in the future with our new editor. Agnès provides the artistic
organisation, which makes FAST the attractive magazine it is, confirmed by the
survey mentioned above.
Our new FAST editor is Kenneth Johnson. Kenneth has wide and long
experience of the commercial aircraft industry from propjet airliners, through
Concorde to the fly-by-wire airliners of today. He has over 20 years experience
with Airbus aircraft, having been involved with all of them from the A300 to the
A340, both in France and Germany. His experience covers various technical and
industry areas including structural, cabin, electrical and avionic systems and he
has spent the last 17 years here in Toulouse involved in the production of
technical, communication and marketing documents for Airbus Customer
Services. He, Denis and Agnès have worked together in the production of this
FAST to ensure a smooth handover and Kenneth will take over as FAST editor
for future issues.
I and my colleagues welcome Kenneth to the Airbus Customer Services
Communications team and wish him well in his new task.
Bruno Piquet,
FAST Publisher
J U L Y 2 0 0 4
Publisher:Bruno Piquet
Editors:Denis Dempster & Kenneth Johnson
Graphic designer:Agnès Massol-Lacombe
assisted by Cécile Lahaye - Sonovision
Customer Services Communication
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
E-mail: fast.digest@airbus.com
Printer Escourbiac
FAST may be read on Internet http://www.airbus.com
under Customer Services/Publications
ISSN 1293-5476
This issue of FAST has been printed on paper
produced without using chlorine,to reduce
waste and help conserve natural resources.
Every little helps!
T
S
E
G
I
D
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
34
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Aging aircraft electrical systems investigation 2
Airbus recommendations to enhance the design &
maintenance of aircraft electrical wiring systems
Dominique Chevant
Electrical protection devices 11
Avoiding overheating
Jean-Luc Barré
Patrick Scudier
How to tackle bleed air leaks 18
Improving durability of seals on hot air ducts
Patrick Grave
Customised Spares Logistics 23
A new Airbus concept based on supply chain
experiences
Helmut Diekhoff
Andreas Teufel
Aircraft Systems Maintenance Aids 28
available from Airbus
A380 accommodation at airports 30
Airbus Customer Services events 31
From the archives... 100 years ago 32
Customer Services 33
Around the clock… Around the world
Airbus Customer Services
© AIRBUS 2004. All rights reserved
The articles herein may be reprinted without permission except where
copyright source is indicated, but with acknowledgement to Airbus.
Articles which may be subject to ongoing review must have their accuracy verified
prior to reprint. The statements made herein do not constitute an offer. They are
based on the assumptions shown and are expressed in good faith. Where the
supporting grounds for these statements are not shown,
the Company will be pleased to explain the basis thereof.
Photo cover © Airbus - Computer graphic by I3M
Photographs by Hervé Bérenger, Hervé Goussé and Philippe Masclet
43
TSAF
1
AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION
43
TSAF
3
43
TSAF
BACKGROUND TASK 1
SAMPLING INSPECTION OF THE
The investigation into a fatal acci- FLEET
dent on 17 July 1996 resulted in a
heightened awareness of the impor- The first working group conducted
tance of maintaining the integrity an in-depth survey of the condi-
of aircraft and, in February 1997, tion of the electrical wiring in an
the US White House Commission aging aircraft fleet. This sampling
on Aviation Safety and Security program included a non-intrusive
(WHCSS) recommended to the inspection of the electrical wiring
Federal Aviation Administration on 81 in-service aircraft (eight air-
(FAA) to work in cooperation craft types selected: B727, B737,
with airlines and manufacturers B747, DC-8, DC-9, DC-10, A300
to expand the FAA’s Aging and L1011) and an intrusive evalua-
Airplane Programme to include tion of the electrical wiring
Aging aircraft
non-structural components. removed from six decommissioned
aircraft, with additional laboratory
In July 1998, the FAA issued the analysis of wiring samples.
Aging Transport Non-Structural
electrical systems Systems Plan to address the A total of 3,372 notable items were
WHCSS recommendation. The found during the survey, most of
Aging Systems Plan focussed them were related to maintenance
specifically on wiring systems. activity, passage of personnel, lack
of housekeeping and/or inadequate
investigation
To help fulfil the actions specified protection. Fluid or chemical cont-
in this Aging Systems Plan, the amination, significant dust, lint
FAA set-up an Aging Transport and metal shavings were seen on
Systems Rulemaking Advisory most aircraft.
Committee (ATSRAC), which is
AAiirrbbuuss rreeccoommmmeennddaattiioonnss
composed of key members of the None of the observed items were
aviation industry, to give recom- determined to be issues affecting
ttoo eennhhaannccee tthhee ddeessiiggnn && mmaaiinntteennaannccee ooff
mendations on aircraft safety aircraft or personnel safety and no
issues and propose enhancements immediate airworthiness issues
aaiirrccrraafftt eelleeccttrriiccaall wwiirriinngg ssyysstteemmss to current procedures. were noted. However, for reasons Wire failures are known
of repeat occurrences in the same to be contributory factors
ATSRAC PHASE 1 general area, 182 items were in some aircraft incidents
Aircraft systems, including electrical wiring systems, Security, chaired by Vice President Gore, thought to be “Significant”. and wire related failures
are becoming more and more complex and electrical the US Federal Aviation Administration and industry ATSRAC focused its efforts on jet Additional engineering analysis can be attributed to
wires and their associated components are becoming representatives are working together to determine transport category aircraft whose was conducted to propose solu- multiple factors. These
increasingly important with respect to aircraft whether existing design and maintenance practices type certificates were at least 20 tions as necessary via either include, but are not
systems that are necessary for safe flight. There has may be improved to ensure the continued years old and in 1998 was given maintenance enhanced inspection limited to: localised heat
been, and continues to be, events associated with wire airworthiness of older aircraft. five major tasks. They included guidelines and processes and/or damage, breached wire
failures, and aging wiring has become a key issue collecting data on aging electrical Service Bulletins (SBs). insulation, embrittlement,
that transcends individual federal agencies. This is being done under the “Aging Transport wiring systems through aircraft chafing, arcing, reduced
System Rule making Advisory Committee” inspections, reviewing aircraft The result of this analysis with insulation resistance,
As a logical follow-on to a 1997 recommendation by (ATSRAC) activities. manufacturer’s fleet service history, regard to five fixes for the A300, defective or broken
the White House Commission on Aviation Safety and reviewing operator’s maintenance and the availability status for each, connectors. Nevertheless,
criteria, standard practices for elec- is provided in table1. problems associated with
trical wiring and repair training systems on aging aircraft
programmes. The evaluation of the survey are not completely related
results and findings indicated that to the degradation of wire
To accomplish these tasks in many cases, the current design, over time. Wire system
ATSRAC chose to establish five maintenance and modification degradation could also
separate working groups com- procedures could identify existing result from inadequate
Dominique Chevant posed of ATSRAC members and or potential electrical wiring design, installation,
Aircraft Aging Systems Manager
industry representatives, to provide problems. However, the survey maintenance and
Customer Services Engineering
technical support in conducting confirmed that these inspection modification practices.
analyses and developing recom- procedures could not always pre-
mendations. vent an actual or potential wiring
2
AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION
43
TSAF
5
43
TSAF
Table 1- A300 inspection and modification status
problem from occurring. Specific In order to ensure that wiring systems
recommendations included enhan- are adequately addressed during
Significant item Status References
cement of scheduled maintenance development of a maintenance pro-
programmes, improved training gramme, the team developed an
1. Clamp slippage - Inspection Service Bulletin (ISB) issued 21-Feb-03 with compliance recommended to assess clamp ISB 24-0094
on rod .. dated 21-Feb-03 programmes, and enhanced pro- Enhanced Zonal Analysis Procedure
- ESPM 20 Repair section provides enhanced technical process for improved gripping of the clamping ESPM 20-52-13 cedures for wiring protection, (EZAP) that complements existing
attachment when found loose.
cleaning and routing. procedures used to develop Zonal
Inspection Programmes. The logic
2. Bundle sagging - Enhanced inspection guidelines as per Task 3 report will be introduced in MPD section Introduction. MPD-Intro
- ESPM 20 Repair section provides enhanced inspection criteria for bundle sagging and technical process ESPM 20-52-13 TASK 2 process assesses each aircraft zone
for repair as necessary
REVIEW OF FLEET SERVICE that contains wiring and, through a
HISTORY series of questions, determines the
3. Conduit clamping - Enhanced inspection guidelines as per Task 3 report will be introduced in MPD section Introduction. MPD-Intro need for tasks to minimize the
at conduit end - ESPM 20 Repair section provides grommet clamps alternative to metal clamps at the end of convoluted ESPM 20-52-13
This second task was to review presence of combustible material
conduits.
existing service data, such as manu- (cleaning tasks), and the need for
facturer’s Service Bulletins, manu- either stand alone GVI’s or dedicated
4. Bundle at - Modification Service Bulletin (MSB) (Mod. 12432/D21880) issued 15-Jan-03 with compliance MSB 24-0096
facturer’s Service Information Detailed Inspections of specific
panel 811VU recommended, to introduce additional bundle protection and attachment. dated 15-Jan-03
- Illustrated Parts Catalog (IPC) will reflect the latest installation configuration as per MOD/SB embodiment (IPC 31-16-12) Letters, All-Operators Telexes, wiring installations in addition to
& reporting process for IPC revision. Operator Information Telexes, and GVI’s performed as part of zonal
the fleet history relating to aircraft inspections.
5. Bracket unstuck - Mod SB (Mod 12431/D21879) issued 15-Jan-03 with compliance recommended, to introduce riveted MSB 24-0097 electrical wiring.
at panel 800VU brackets. dated 15-Jan-03 TASK 4
- Illustrated Parts Catalog (IPC) reflects the latest installation configuration as per MOD/SB embodiment (IPC 31-16-11)
& reporting process for IPC revision. Each aircraft manufacturer STANDARD PRACTICES FOR
reviewed thousands of documents ELECTRICAL WIRING
to determine the need for specific
recommendation, or upgrade of The task of this working group was
compliance. As far as Airbus air- to review any documentation related
Table 2 - Service Bulletins upgraded from “Recommended” to “Mandatory” craft are concerned, three A300 SBs to wiring standard practices, which
were proposed for compliance is used to inspect or repair aircraft
change, from “Recommended” to wiring, and to identify areas for
SB reference Issue date Title References of “Mandatory” (seeTable2). possible improvement.
A310 and A300-600 SB
In addition five A300 SBs were The main working group recom-
24-0053 14-Apr-81 Electrical power - Pylon - Inspection of feeder cables 24-2021 Rev 7: 31-Jul-02
Rev 7 31-Jul-02 24-6011 Rev 6: 31-Jul-02 issued with a “recommended” mendations were to all aircraft
compliance instead of “Desirable” manufacturers to adopt a common
24-0079 15-Mar-93 Improve tightening of APU starter feeder terminal blocks 24-2045 Rev 6: 25-Feb-03 or “Optional”. When applicable, document format including the
Rev 3 25-Feb-03 24-6034 Rev 4: 25-Feb-03 the A300 recommendations were same standard practices for care
validated on A310/A300-600 air- and maintenance of wiring systems.
24-0083 25-Feb-94 Inspect and repair wiring looms in wing/pylon inter face area 24-2052 Rev 5: 31-Jul--002 craft (seeTable2).
Rev 4 31-Jul-02 24-6039 Rev 8: 31-Jul-02 TASK 5
TASK 3 INSPECTION AND REPAIR
Service Bulletins upgraded from "Desirable" or "Optional" to "Recommended" IMPROVEMENT OF MAINTENANCE TRAINING
CRITERIA
SB reference Issue date Title References of The fifth task consisted of reviewing
A310 and A300-600 SB
Using knowledge gained from airline and repair station training
Task 1, the third working group programmes for inspection and
24-0085 12-Dec-94 Improve strength of the electrical bundles at flap screw jack 24-6043 Rev 4
Rev 5 06-Mar-01 issued 06-Mar-01 addressed maintenance practices repair of non-structural systems, to
and the effectiveness of maintenance ensure that they adequately covered
25-0119 22-Dec-78 Improvement of wire bundle protection in FWD cargo compartment N/A programmes. Recommendations aging wiring system components.
Rev 6 13-Nov-00 were developed to enhance general The working group confirmed that
practices concerning in-service training programmes should be
27-0100 26-Jun-78 Rerouting of wire assembly 813 VB between FR 84 V - strut and variable lever N/A handling of electrical wiring. enhanced in the area of wiring
Rev 4 13-Nov-00 arm unit These included guidance on the maintenance practices and deliver a
minimisation of contamination standardised training curriculum
28-0057 21-Jun-78 Installation of thermo shrinkable tube for protection of fuel pump feeders N/A during repairs/servicing and an containing a series of recommended,
Rev 2 08-Jan-01 enhancement of inspection crite- detailed lesson plans covering addi-
ria, particularly with respect to tional training for aging systems. The
53-0046 29-Jun-78 Improve wiring installation between FR 25 and FR 31 in the cargo compartment N/A improving the effectiveness of content would be adjusted for any
Rev 2 13-Nov-00
General Visual Inspections model of aircraft and student skill
(GVIs). level.
4
AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION
43
TSAF
7
43
TSAF
ATSRAC five tasks and subsequently wiring systems, and to combine arrangement of Standard Wiring
PHASE 2 assigned four additional tasks to these current regulations into one Practices make it difficult to locate
ATSRAC in January 2001. These section. and extract pertinent data neces-
The results and recommendations new tasks were intended to facili- sary for electrical repairs. The team
from the above initial tasking indi- tate implementation of earlier rec- The product for this working therefore defined a standard for-
cated that problems associated ommendations. As a result, four group was the creation of a new mat and minimum content of the
with wiring systems on aging air- new working groups were estab- FAR/JAR Part 25 Subpart H that Electrical Standard Wiring
craft were not completely related lished. contains all existing Part 25 Practices Manual (ESWPM) so
to the degradation over time of requirements, including the cre- that aircraft maintenance techni-
wiring systems. The review of TASK 6 ation of new requirements for cians can easily use manuals from
these systems also found inade- ADDRESS THE NEED FOR NEW wire system safety assessment, different manufacturers.
quate installation and mainte- WIRE SYSTEM CERTIFICATION wire separation and wire identifi-
nance practices could lead to what REQUIREMENTS cation. An Advisory Circular was In addition, the working group pro-
is commonly referred to an “aging developed to support these new/ posed that paper-based legacy doc-
system” problem. Therefore the Specifically, Task 6 was formed to proposed regulations. uments be upgraded to reflect for-
scope of ATSRAC is not limited address wire related certification mat and content. Nevertheless,
solely to age-related issues, but issues. The working group was TASK 7 documents created and used in
also involves improving the con- therefore tasked to review all pre- ADDRESS THE NEED FOR AN electronic form, and because of the
tinued airworthiness of aircraft vious recommendations in the ELECTRICAL STANDARD WIRING searchable nature of the electronic
systems, and in particular wiring Code of Federal Airworthiness PRACTICES MANUAL document, need not implement a
systems. Regulations (FAR) 14 Part 25, in standardized format. The structure
Joint Airworthiness Regulations At the conclusion of the Task 4 of these electronically-based docu-
The FAA accepted the ATSRAC (JAR) Part 25 and ATSRAC, to report, the working group stated ments is in fact transparent to the
recommendations from the first identify all requirements related to that the current presentation and user.
6
AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION
43
TSAF
AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION
TASK 8 part now of a new ATSRAC task. to provide technical support to to take over from the AMM
ENHANCED TRAINING However, it is likely that aircraft develop recommendations on Chapter 20. A generic Electrical
PROGRAMME FOR ELECTRICAL manufacturers will have to develop these tasks: Standard Practices Manual (ESPM)
WIRING SYSTEMS EZAP within 24 months after the was launched in April 2001. This
rule goes into effect. Then, opera- • Assemble technical and new manual encompasses the old
Previous tasking to ATSRAC tors are likely to be required to economic information and Chapter 20 and new chapters like
resulted in recommendations incorporate the EZAP tasks into alternatives to the previous standard inspection tasks, cleaning
regarding the need for develop- their maintenance programmes recommended actions, identify tasks, electrical component repair
ment of an enhanced training within one year after EZAP the minimum set of training to and replacement procedures, etc, to
programme addressing wiring sys- development. support EZAP and provide make easier the application of
tems. In continuity with these pre- recommendations on the wiring inspection. This manual was
vious recommendations, a wiring FAA ACTION PLAN extension of EZAP applicability lately updated to improve recom-
maintenance training programme to STC installations. mendations regarding wiring instal-
was developed including wire sys- The ATSRAC efforts are part of an • Review and develop lation and protection and to add
tem practices and documentation, overarching plan developed by the implementation plans for guidelines on wiring separation.
inspection, applicable repair FAA. This Enhanced Air- viable tools and methods
schemes, wiring modifications and worthiness Programme for resulting from ongoing FAA ELECTRICAL WIRING
wiring repairs. This training is cus- Aircraft Systems (EAPAS) out- research programme. INTERCONNECTION SYSTEMS
tomised for different target groups lines the recommendations of the COURSE
and could be used for initial and ATSRAC but is also intended to Completion of the above tasks is Airbus Training Division has
refresher training. focus on all aircraft systems, expected by January 2005. Never- developed a wiring training course
including mechanical systems, theless, the overall FAA Aging based on the ATSRAC Task 5 and 8
TASK 9 which will undergo detailed evalu- Aircraft programme encompasses recommendations. This training
IMPLEMENT AN ENHANCED ation after wiring systems. The numerous rulemaking programmes called “Electrical Wiring Inter-
MAINTENANCE PROGRAMME current focus of this programme (Fuel Tank Safety Operational Rules, connection Systems” course is to
FOR WIRING SYSTEMS resolves around aging wiring sys- Aging Systems, Aging Structure, help operators better understand
tems and provides strategies for Widespread Fatigue Damage, and maintain their aircraft electri-
This working group was tasked to how the FAA and industry will Corrosion Prevention Control cal installation. This course is cus-
propose regulatory text and sup- work to improve the airworthiness Programme), which may result in tomised to cover all Airbus aircraft
porting advisory material to of wire systems through near-term several rulemakings that require per- and incorporates practical and
reflect the recommendations pro- and long-term actions, with the formance of non-scheduled mainte- hands-on sessions to teach techni-
vided in the earlier Task 3 report. intent to disseminate the products nance checks. The FAA therefore set cians how to adequately evaluate
thorough the industry. up a “Tiger Team” to review imple- the wiring system and effectively
In its original concept, the mentation methods and compliance use the applicable aircraft wiring
Enhanced Zonal Analysis The EAPAS also includes an times with the objectives to develop practices documentation.
Procedure (EZAP) envisioned an extensive Aging Electrical System an integrated plan to align all rule-
analysis of all wiring installed in Research Programme. This pro- making programmes and to priori- AIRBUS EZAP POLICY
zones in which combustible mate- gramme is intended to conduct tize rules if necessary. The “Tiger AND PROCEDURES
rials may be present. The logic research into aging wiring systems Team” results are not yet available Airbus has initiated the process of
would identify where additional to determine mechanisms that but publication of the Notice of developing EZAP for all their
repetitive tasks in these zones drive the aging process, develop Proposed Rulemaking and Advisory aircraft types. Airbus is currently
would minimise accumulation of tools to better inspect and maintain Circulars is not expected before mid testing application of the EZAP
these materials and/or would wiring, and develop technologies 2005. on a sample of aircraft includ-
improve the likelihood that wiring that mitigate the hazards associated ing A300/A310, A320 and
system degradation, including age with wiring failure. AIRBUS ACTION A330/A340 families. The
related issues, will be identified Airbus EZAP policy and proce-
and corrected in a timely manner. The FAA is now considering the Airbus has supported ATSRAC dures have been presented to
ATSRAC recommendations on the since 1998 through active partici- and accepted by all Industry
Analysing all wiring retrofitted second set of tasks forwarded in pation within the ATSRAC com- Steering Committees and with
into the aircraft under November 2002. The FAA recog- mittees and various working the exception of the A300,
Supplemental Type Certificate nized the benefits that ATSRAC groups and has already initiated the will be applied to all Airbus types
(STC) modifications, was deemed provided through previous tasking following actions: through the Maintenance Review
not cost beneficial when com- and therefore requested that com- Board (MRB) process. Depending
bined with the recommended mittee’s assistance throughout the ELECTRICAL STANDARD on the aircraft type, final validation
training for technicians. EAPAS rulemaking process. PRACTICES MANUAL of EZAP procedures are scheduled
Mandatory implementation of Therefore, the FAA requested To anticipate ATSRAC Tasks 4 and from mid 2004 till mid 2005.
both EZAP and Electrical Wiring ATSRAC in April 2003 to manage 7 recommendations, Airbus decid-
Training is therefore still under additional tasks and ATSRAC ed to develop a new electrical For the A300, new and modified
discussion within the FAA and is formed two new working groups standard wiring practices manual tasks that are recommended to be
8
43
TSAF
9
43
TSAF
In spite of the precautions taken in the selection of This article presents three families of electrical
aircraft electrical cables and their installation, protection devices:
unforeseen overheating may occur. Overheating may
also be due to an abnormal electrical load on a piece of • Thermal Circuit Breakers (CB),
equipment. This could then result in the total or partial widely used to date,
de-activation of the electrical installation owing to a • Arc Fault Circuit Breakers (AFCB),
short circuit, so electrical installations must be under development,
protected against this hazard. To this end, electrical • Solid State Power Controller (SSPC),
circuit protection devices achieve this function. introduced with A380.
Jean-Luc Barré Patrick Scudier
Aircraft Electrical Installation and Standard Items Aircraft Electrical Installation and Standard Items
Customer Services Engineering Customer Services Engineering
11
43
TSAF
AGING AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS INVESTIGATION ELECTRICAL PROTECTION DEVICES
added to operator's programs will be • confirm the material selection,
promulgated by an SB expected mid • confirm the predicted
2005. All new recommendations performance of the complete
will be included in the MPD revi- electrical wiring installation and
sion following publication of the SB to update if necessary the
(for A300) and revised MRB inspection and repair processes.
Reports (for all other types).
All inspections confirmed the
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATION robustness of both A300 and
MATURITY REVIEW A320 family electrical installation
In addition to the above actions, and but also provided valuable infor-
to anticipate ATSRAC future mation in respect to technology
requirements, Airbus decided in with regards to certain electrical
2000 to launch an electrical installa- components, wiring installation
tion survey programme on early and operators’ maintenance prac-
A320s, called Electrical Installation tices. They also confirmed the
Maturity Review (EIMR). need for increased awareness
among electrical maintenance
In fact, Airbus initiated its own personnel of the importance of Electrical
Aging Aircraft Electrical Installa- wiring installation (and specifi-
tion Survey programme in 1992 cally wiring segregation on fly-
with the A300 (See “Aging – The by-wire aircraft) and to improve
Electrical Connection”, FAST ESPM for wiring installation and protection devices
n°14 Feb 93 and FAST n°18 Jun separation guidelines.
95). As well as for the A300, the
A320 EIMR programme consists Both studies also highlighted the
of wiring inspections of a sample need to do this type of review on
of in-service aircraft to ascertain other Airbus aircraft types.
It is widely recognized in the electrical industry
the condition of the complete Inspection of the A310 and
wiring installation, and to collect A300-600 aircraft has been that wiring has to be protected against overheating.
and use data with the intent to: recently initiated and other
Aircraft electrical circuits are no exception,
Airbus aircraft types will follow
• confirm the wiring installation in sequence.
as this article explains.
design principle and improve if
necessary the present electrical
design,
Conclusion
CONTACT DETAILS The FAA has launched an Airbus is fully participating
important programme on aircraft and supporting the FAA advisory
Dominique Chevant
systems aging to enhance the committee tasks and follow-up
Aircraft Aging Systems Manager
current aircraft systems efforts. In addition, aircraft
Customer Services Engineering
airworthiness programmes manufacturers are coordinating
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 29 28
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 25 and ATSRAC was requested to ensure a continuing consistent
dominique.chevant@airbus.com to develop, co-ordinate and programme support and
follow-up the implementation of communication to their
the enhancements related to the customers.
design and maintenance of
aircraft electrical systems and
associated documentation and
training.
10
43
TSAF
ELECTRICAL DEVICES PROTECTION EELLEECCTTRRIICCAALL DDEEVVIICCEESS PPRROOTTEECCTTIIOONN
Overheated 50Amp CB
One pole CB
THERMAL CIRCUIT cockpit and in the bulk cargo com- A high number of the overheats
BREAKER partment. This is why monitoring experienced on 50Amp CBs were
means are required to enable the found to be due to insufficient One topic of the FAA Aging
A thermal CB will cause the circuit crew to check CB status. The tightening of attachment screws Electrical Systems Research
to open when a predetermined cur- CBMU (Circuit Breaker Monito- leading to loose connections. The Program (refer to the “Aging aircraft
rent is detected. The circuit open- ring Unit) linked to each circuit wire terminals should be tightened electrical systems” article page 2 to
ing is achieved by a thermal sens- breaker auxiliary contact allows to the correct torque value given in 10) focused on aging circuit break-
ing element (e.g. bi-metal) whose monitoring of individual circuit the AMM (Aircraft Maintenance ers. In November 2002 the FAA
Not monitored Monitored
characteristics are dependent on the breakers. The principal functions Manual) chapter 20-21-12 or ESPM issued a report ref. DOT/FFF/
current. of the CBMU are: (Electrical Standard Practices AR-01/118 that provides technical
Manual) chapter 20-46-10. data for a series of tests on circuit
These CBs are selected according • acquisition of the circuit breakers removed from several
to their: breaker position, The high number of reports of retired large transport aircraft.
Three pole CB
• monitoring of the circuit 50Amp CBs tripping has resulted
• tripping time with respect to breaker, 50AMP CBs in a number of corrective improve- The results of the study indicated that
the current intensity, • circuit breaker identification and ON A300/A310 FAMILY AIRCRAFT ments and inspections such as: circuit breakers installed in aircraft
• compensation with respect to transmission to the ECAM Ref. Documents: with extended service life will con-
the ambient temperature. (Electronic Centralised Aircraft AOT 24-08, OIT 999.0077/99, SIL 24-045, • decrease of electrical load of tinue to protect the electrical wire
Monitor) to build CB page TFU 92.00.00.006 some AC (alternating current) provided there is a more controlled
These characteristics are specific to display, Bus bars (Mods 8648 & 11134), evaluation of circuit breaker aging.
each CB and are given in the • proper functioning of the built- On Airbus A300/A310 family • installation of a larger wire The report makes several recommen-
Airbus Standards Manual. in-test-equipment (BITE). operators have reported 50Amp gauge on some CBs dations aimed at improving the relia-
CBs tripping or being overheated. (Mod11332), bility of circuit breakers, and reduc-
The CBs can be of three poles In the event a circuit breaker trips Investigations revealed the fol- • inspection of the most heavily ing maintenance related problems,
(115VAC three-phase) or single (disconnects), a warning signal is lowing causes: loaded 50Amp CBs, including:
pole (28VDC or 115VAC single- generated on the ECAM and EWD • replacement of the existing
phase). In addition to the main con- (Engine/Warning Display). The • possible high load in certain 50Amp CBs by improved • periodic cycling of circuit
tacts (used in a power circuit), cir- crew can then call up the circuit configurations, ones. breakers,
cuit breakers may have auxiliary breaker tripped list on the SD • temperatures up to 180°C at • inspection of circuit breaker
contacts that are used to make a (System Display). circuit breaker terminal strips The latest standard is part num- panels for loose or broken
permanent check of the main con- causing burn marks on the ber NSA931323-501 hardware, incorrect wire
tact position. For other aircraft types (A300/A310 casing, Amendment B. attachment, overheating and
and A320 family aircraft) most of • variation of circuit breaker electrical arcing.
CB MONITORING the CBs are located in the cockpit. tripping characteristics due to TRIPPED CB REENGAGEMENT
However, monitoring of some CBs malfunction of the Ref. Document: OIT/FOT 999.0172/99 The FAA is now considering these
On A330/A340 Family aircraft the is performed via various methods of temperature compensation recommendations and is expected to
CBs are located in the avionics CB status acquisition depending on function, The likely cause for CB tripping is provide guidance material that rec-
compartment underneath the aircraft type. • insufficient tightening of an abnormality in the electrical ommends the above.
attachment screws causing load or in the associated wiring.
circuit breaker temperature Consequently, reengagement of a It is also Airbus’ intent to issue a
increase. tripped CB may aggravate any Service Information Letter that rec-
ommends operators to perform an
initial manual cycling of all thermal
circuit breakers on and off under no
power within an initial 24 month
period and thereafter at intervals not
to exceed 36 months.
The Airbus Enhanced Zonal Analysis
Procedure will also consider circuit
breaker panels to permit visual
inspection of circuit breakers.
13
43
TSAF
12
ELECTRICAL DEVICES PROTECTION
Arc Fault Circuit Breaker (AFCB) Only AFCB implementation on a
technology has been already intro- 115VAC aircraft electrical network
duced into housing and industrial was considered in the first phase of
markets over the past 10 years. the programme. A prototype test
Adapting the technology for use in programme has been defined with
aircraft will improve safety by suppliers and AFCB prototypes
reducing arcing occurrences and have been tested on an electrical
their consequences, and will laboratory test bench, then during
reduce costs by limiting damage to an aircraft test flight. The next step
both electrical wiring and the sur- is now to conduct an evaluation of
rounding area. the AFCB end-component maturity
on aircraft during a six month period
AIRBUS ACTION to be completed by the end of 2004.
Due to the specifics of circuit After having demonstrated good
breakers installed on Airbus aircraft maturity, an industrial product
(in terms of specifications and over- qualification will proceed and
all dimensions), Airbus decided in Airbus may then determine which
2000 to launch its own AFCB pro- systems the AFCB will be used on.
gramme, similar to that of the FAA.
The first feasibility phase of such a SOLID STATE POWER
programme defined single pole CONTROLLER
and three pole AFCBs that, in addi-
tion to the functions provided by The electrical power distribution
traditional circuit breakers, have system in the A380 introduces a big
the ability to detect complex current- jump forward for the protection
time waveforms that are charac- function by using the Solid State
teristic of wiring anomalies/arcing Power Controller (SSPC).
in an aircraft environment. Other
challenges were to develop prod- The SSPCmodule is a conjunction
ucts likely to replace current circuit of electronic and semiconductor
breakers at competitive prices within devices in the same electronic card.
the 1-50Amp range, and to solve the Unlike the conventional thermal CB
main issues of reliability and overall or AFCB that are considered electri-
dimensions. cal standard items, the SSPC
43
TSAF
15
43
TSAF
ELECTRICAL DEVICES PROTECTION
15
43
TSAF
Protection and
commutation devices
Additional benefits
of SSPC technology
15
43
TSAF
ELECTRICAL DEVICES PROTECTION
electrical damage by propagating ARC FAULT
it, with possible risk of affecting CIRCUIT BREAKERS
other equipment. It may even
result in a temperature increase Research into new technologies to
and smoke emission in the area improve wiring safety is a key issue
concerned. for individual federal agencies and
industry. To this end, the Federal
Airbus recommendations with Aviation Agency (FAA) has
regard to the reengagement of a launched an extensive Aging
tripped CB in flight and on the Electrical System Research Pro-
ground are as follows: gram (refer to the “Aging aircraft
electrical systems” article page 2 to
• In flight, Airbus does not 10). This programme is intended to
authorise a pilot to reengage a conduct research into aging wiring
CB which tripped by itself, systems to determine mechanisms
unless the Captain, using that drive the aging process, develop
his/her emergency authority, tools to better inspect and maintain
judges it necessary for safe wiring, and develop technologies
continuation of the flight. In that mitigate the hazards associated
this emergency case, only one with wiring failure.
reengagement should be
attempted. As part of this programme, the
• On the ground, the pilot may FAA, in partnership with the
reengage the CB provided the Office of Naval Research, initiated
action is coordinated with the a study of arc-fault circuit interrup-
maintenance team and the tion technology, which promises to
cause of the CB tripping is overcome some of the issues
identified. caused by wiring degradation.
These recommendations are also PRINCIPLE
detailed in the applicable chapters
of the FCOM (Flight Crew The Arc Fault Circuit Breakers
Operating Manual) and TSM provide additional protection
(Trouble Shooting Manual). against arcing conditions in addition
to the thermal overload protection
provided by thermal CBs. Arc
Fault Circuit Interruption (AFCI)
technology monitors the electrical
circuit for arcing events that are
indicative of potential wiring
Arc Fault Circuit Breaker
issues that could result in a short
circuit. In essence, the device
keeps a count of each momentary
insulation breakdown and breaks
the circuit when the count of these
exceeds a predefined number. The
heating caused by these intermit-
tent contacts may be below the
normal rating of a thermal CB.
14
ELECTRICAL DEVICES PROTECTION
system for dispatch under MEL
criteria. So, PDMI can be consid-
ered as a virtual Circuit Breaker
Panel.
Some PDMI Functions are:
• provide manual override
ON/OFF control of each
SSPCchannel,
• secure the open state of SSPC
channels (flag or lock-out),
• provide manual reengagement
to tripped channels,
• review configuration status
and load assignment,
• display Built-In-Test Status,
• summary of tripped channels
and manually opened channels
• sort by ATA chapter,
• sort by Power Bus and/or
MMEL,
• maintenance status (e.g. name
of operator, maintenance
duration, reason for lock-out).
43
TSAF
17
43
TSAF
17
43
TSAF
3. Tag the CB
Module is part of the electrical
power centre, and is considered as
equipment.
The SSPC Module works primarily
as a protection device for the aircraft
wiring against overload, and as a
system power supply switch for
technical operation and load man-
agement.
The SSPC has the same function as
a circuit breaker, but by using a
comparison of a triggering curve
rather than the traditional mechani-
cal tripping function. 4. Warning message when CB has been tagged
So, basically, the SSPC technology
combines the functions of the cir-
cuit breaker and relay in classical
electromechanical technology.
With this new technology, the trip
threshold of the device protection is
programmable. It also allows
switching ON/OFF of the loads,
and controls and monitors the
switch status.
SSPC cards are customisable for
the cabin loads. For each SSPC
channel, two current ratings are
available: 3A to 5A and 7.5A to
Conclusion
15A with in-between software pro-
gramming capability.
Due to the large number of circuits CONTACT DETAILS The electrical devices protection At the time of writing the FAA had
to protect, it would have been nec- such as thermal CB, AFCB, or not mandated installation of AFCBs
Jean-Luc Barré
essary to have a huge panel and SSPC have the same main basic and even though the FAA strongly
Aircraft Electrical Installation
space available if classical function: ensure protection of aircraft supports activities to define Arc Fault
and Standard Items
electromechanical technology Customer Services Engineering electrical installations. Whatever the Detection CBs, it is expected that
were used. This new technology Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 82 52 technology used, tripped electrical replacement of conventional circuit
allows reduction of the man- Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 25 devices protection should only be breakers by AFCBs will be up to the
machine interface whilst saving jean-luc.barre@airbus.com reengaged once, if at all, as airlines.
described above and in the
weight.
Patrick Scudier appropriate manuals such as the The sheer size of the A380 and
Aircraft Electrical Installation AMM and TSM. thesignificantly greater electrical
POWER DISTRIBUTION
and Standard Items
installation has meant that
MAINTENANCE INTERFACE (PDMI) Customer Services Engineering
A relatively new technology – conventional circuit protection
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 06 71
ArcFault Circuit Interruption (AFCI) devices would take up far too much
The new SSPC technology allows Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 25
technology – has been developed to space and be excessively heavy.
a newer maintenance man-machine patrick.scudier@airbus.com
improve the overall level of aircraft This has led to the development of
interface. One of the functions of
wiring protection. This new the Solid State Power Controller,
the Power Distribution Mainte-
technology that is predictive in which provides the necessary
nance Interface (PDMI) is to allow
nature, will reduce arcing protection, a user-friendly man-
the engineer to control the SSPC as
occurrences and possible collateral machine interface, and several
a conventional circuit breaker. damage. possibilities of customisation.
They may be tripped and tagged to
permit maintenance, or to isolate a
17
43
TSAF
16
43
TSAF
ELECTRICAL DEVICES PROTECTION
Example of SSPC maintenance status
4 examples of screen pages displaying the maintenance
status of the SSPC
1. Search by CBs in fuel system
2. Select a CB
16
43
TSAF
17
HOWTOTACKLEBLEED AIR LEAKS
43
TSAF
HOWTOTACKLEBLEED AIR LEAKS HOWTOTACKLEBLEED AIR LEAKS
QUALIFICATION TESTING
Two types of qualification testing,
(dynamic and static) were imposed:
Patrick Grave
Group Manager
Pneumatics,Ice and Fire Protection
Customer Services Engineering
19
43
TSAF
DYNAMIC TESTING
• Total of 240,000 movement cycles at 24 cycles/minute.
• Combination of ±10 mm (0.4inch) linear and ±3°angular
displacement to simulate wing bending.
• 200,000 cycles at 215°C (420°F) and 40,000 cycles at 260°C
(500°F) representing aircraft operation(see illustration below).
• One pressure cycle for every twomovement cycles, ambient to
4.2bar (61psi)(see illustration above).
STATIC TESTING
• Proof pressure 6.2bar (90psi) at 215°C (420°F) for 1 minute.
• Burst pressure 13.2bar (190psi) at 215°C (420°F) for 1 minute.
QUALIFICATION RESULT QUALIFICATION CRITERIA
Static qualification testing
• Static leak rate at 4.2bar
At the end of this qualification test- (61psi) in cold and hot state
How to tackle
ing, only one seal satisfied the well below maximum
qualification criteria (seal A on the allowed.
illustration Qualification test bench • No extrusion tendencies.
on page 21).That seal being identi- • Minimal wear.
bleed air leaks
fied as PN ABS1040 is manufac- • No cracks, extrusion or
tured by Advanced Products. deformation after proof and
burst test.
Improving durability of seals
Dynamic qualification testing
on hot air ducts
Leaks from bleed air ducts cause approximately Later, as the technology evolved, different seals
one third of ATA36 operational interruptions. were proposed. Each were to the latest technology,
A high proportion of these leaks can be attributed to but never providing the durability desired. The latest
previous generation seals. These seals are fitted at in the series was ABS0737.
numerous locations in the bleed (ATA36), anti-ice
(ATA30) and air conditioning (ATA21) systems. To cater for this situation Airbus introduced a periodic
Consequently, the need for a reliable seal is of the seal replacement in the MPD (Maintenance Planning
utmost importance to the efficient operation of an Document) to avoid operational interruptions. In
aircraft. parallel a call for tender was launched with various
seal manufacturers. The primary goal was to find a
At the beginning of Airbus operations, bleed air ducts new seal able to withstand the new qualification
were equipped with a pair of seals with part numbers process called “accelerated aging test”. This test being
(PN) NSA8054-08 and PN NSA8054-09, being used a combination of endurance, temperature and pressure
together. This type of seal was, at that time, the only conditions more demanding than those used previously
one available on the market. and adapted to the latest materials.
18
HOWTOTACKLEBLEED AIR LEAKS
Test performances show:
• the ABS1040 seals provide
significant reduction in bleed
air leakage compared to the
ABS0737 seals.
• the ABS1040 seals continue
to provide excellent long-term
performance while the
The PN ABS1040 seal is made of ABS0737 seals degrade over
PTFE (polytetrafluorethylene), in time resulting in steadily
two parts: deteriorating performance.
• the seal is equipped with a IN-SERVICE EVALUATION
spring to keep it expanded,
• a filler ring to reduce the Also, before making this new seal
volume of the recess. available for general airline use, it
was decided to perform an in-service
PERFORMANCE
evaluation to confirm that the tests
COMPARISON
reflected the real life environment.
This evaluation was performed with
Following the qualification test, five different airlines operating in
another test programme was per- different environmental conditions
formed to compare the performance (Cathay Pacific, Air Macau,
of the ABS1040 seals to the Lufthansa, MyTravel and Austrian
ABS0737 seals (“back to back Airlines) and on two aircraft types
testing”).For that purpose, a specif- (two A330/A340 Family and four
AABBSS11004400 sseeaallss
ic “back to back” test bench was A320 Family).
developed in order to be able to
compare the performance of the This evaluation has accumulated
AABBSS00773377 sseeaallss
two types of seal in real time and in more than 26,000 flight hours and
similar conditions. 12,500 flight cycles without any
seal failure or detection of any
Seals were installed on production bleed air leaks, demonstrating the
ducts during the pressure and tem- good behavior of seal ABS1040
perature cycles. during aircraft operation
Qualification test benches
Leakage per cycle (grams/second)
Seal A 0 0 0 0 0.1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.1
Seal B 0 0 0 0 0.3 0 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.2 0.2 0.3
Seal C 0 0 0.1 0 0 0 0.1 0 0 0 0 0 0.1
Seal D 0 0.1 0 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.3 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1 0.2
Leakage
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 110 120
Cycles
43
TSAF
HOWTOTACKLEBLEED AIR LEAKS
AABBSS11004400 sseeaallss
AABBSS00773377 sseeaallss
Following the test, the ABS0737 seal showed significant deterioration and erosion
while the ABS1040 seal remained in excellent condition
21
43
TSAF
Back to back test bench
ABS0737 ABS1040
20
43
TSAF
HOWTOTACKLEBLEED AIR LEAKS CUSTOMISED SPARESLOGISTICS
RESULTS and a direct benefit on the
Operational Interruption rate.
From the investigation, it is clear
that seal ABS1040 will bring about A direct consequence of the reduc-
a much-wanted decrease in bleed tion in Operational Interruptions is
air leaks. the positive effect it will have on
the Direct Maintenance Costs of an
A Detection Leak Localisation aircraft. A reduction in this area is
System (DLLS) has been installed of major importance to airlines and
on the A340-500, -600 series. It is always sought after. This will be
dedicated to maintenance and sim- brought about as a result of the
plifies troubleshooting so reducing introduction of ABS1040 seals and
the amount of time the aircraft is by the reduction in the number of
delayed on the ground. A combina- times the aircraft is grounded due
tion of the DLLS and new seals to bleed leaks.
should have a significant impact
Customised
Spares Logistics
Conclusion
It is clearly evident that Bleed Air adequately to satisfy the
CONTACT DETAILS A new Airbus concept based
Leaks caused by inadequate sealing requirements set by the investigation
Patrick Grave have been a continuous cause of process. Airbus now uses the
Group Manager,Pneumatics, concern over a number of years. ABS1040 seals on new production on supply chain experiences
Ice and Fire Protection Despite some improvements in aircraft bleed air systems.
Customer Services Engineering technology standards, seals still
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 43 13
failed to meet the desired level of Furthermore, it should be noted that
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 38
performance. However, upon the after installation of the ABS1040 During the life cycle of an aircraft, time, information technology (IT) based monitoring
patrick.grave@airbus.com
highly successful completion of the seals (mod number in table above) location and requirement of spare parts are not systems are all key elements involved in harmonising
“accelerated aging test”, having the the preventive seal replacement usually plannable. the spares related processes, resulting in cost savings
results of the “back to back test” recommended in the Maintenance and high transparency. Following these requirements
with the previous bleed seal Planning Document (MPD) will be Therefore on-time delivery of spare parts requires Airbus Spares Support and Services in Hamburg, as
standard, and the in-service cancelled and only the leak check
integration and management of flexible supply chains the headquarters for world-wide spares supply for
evaluation, it was agreed to select will remain. The periodicity of the
between the vendor’s activities and customer’s Airbus aircraft, has developed Customised Spares
the ABS1040 seal for in-service and leak check will be reviewed upon
requirements. The physical distribution of parts, Logistics (CSL).
production aircraft. feedback of in-service experience.
qualified communication and sophisticated
The new bleed seal incorporates The incorporation of this modification
significant design improvements due is highly recommended by Airbus
to both the material change and the since it is now well demonstrated
new shape. The seal is made from that the ABS1040 seal will
Teflon, superseding the traditional dramatically improve bleed air
silicon and the innovative new shape system performance, bring a
incorporates a two-part design significant reduction in maintenance
feature. As explained in this article, costs, and improve aircraft dispatch Helmut Diekhoff Andreas Teufel
Manager Customised Spares Logistics Director Spares Marketing
the Teflon material and the reliability.
Spares Support & Services Spares Support & Services
revamped design perform
23
43
TSAF
22
43
TSAF
CUSTOMISED SPARESLOGISTICS CCCUUUSSSTTTOOOMMMIIISSSEEEDDD SSSPPPAAARRREEESSSLLLOOOGGGIIISSSTTTIIICCCSSS
SUPPLY CHAIN DRIVING point the achieved delivery This situation causes considerable SERVICE SCOPE
FORCES performance very much uncertainty so an increased effort of
depends on the ability of this tracking and tracing of shipments is Airbus manages dedicated approved
Based on 30 years of experience in subcontracted forwarder to required, particularly for priority forwarders, negotiating freight rates,
supply chain management and effectively transport the customer requests such as AOG steering the complete supply chain
logistics, Airbus Spares is clearly shipments to the customer. (Aircraft on Ground) orders. up to the point of demand. Priority
aware of some weaknesses in the shipments like AOG and WSP
conventional supply chain. The eye Here the challenge starts. For eco- Aircraft operators, aware of the (Work Stoppage) are monitored on
opener was during an Airbus sym- nomic and process-related reasons supply chain and delivery risks, are their way to the customer. Routine
posium when the customers com- forwarders tend to consolidate forced to compensate with either (RTN) shipments are consolidated
plained of a delivery performance shipments, route them through dis- increased manpower for tracking to further reduce customers’ costs.
of 66% versus Airbus’ reported tribution hubs, subcontract second and tracing efforts, or increased Delivery is performed to the agreed
delivery performance of 98%. or third tier service providers and and costly spares provisioning and location and within the agreed time-
integrators, or are requested to inventory levels. frame.
It appears that 30% of the perfor- consider service freight for ship-
mance gets lost within the supply ping customer goods. OBJECTIVE OF CUSTOMISED ADVANCED TRACKING
chain between the supplier and the SPARES LOGISTICS AND TRACING ABILITIES
customer’s final location. The fol- This fragmentation of the supply
lowing describes what occurs with- chain in respect to shipment The objective of the Customised The management of transport is
in the conventional supply chain: responsibility and actual handling, Spares Logistics scheme is to address performed by Airbus and all ship-
causes the challenges to perfor- the tracking and tracing problems ments are actively monitored.
• Suppliers prepare the shipments mance which customers experi- described above and bring relief to Additionally the customer has the
for dispatch and hand them over ence. Each change in responsibili- customers by providing updated possibility to get advanced, mile-
to the customer appointed ty, each hand-over, each interface information about the shipment at stone based, tracking data via the
forwarders. With this hand-over, within the supply chain inherits a any time, and supplied by one single Internet based Airbus Spares Portal,
the shipment passes the so certain amount of risk causing source. The customer can then rest http://spares.airbus.com.
called “yellow line” of the shipment delay, transport ineffi- assured that the shipment will arrive
suppliers warehouse or airport; ciency and loss of transparency. on time with a guaranteed delivery By integrating the web-sites of for-
this means the supplier is no performance of 98%. warders and integrators, customers
longer responsible for the The supplier at the start of the sup- receive 24h on-line real-time track-
shipment. ply chain, as well as the customer The performance level is assured ing and tracing information through
• The forwarder who picks up the at the other end, can lose track of through continuous performance the Airbus Spares Portal. In addi-
shipment, is conventionally the shipment and no longer be able measurement by Airbus. Customised tion, Airbus monitors each priority
subcontracted by the final to determine the current location Spares Logistics is focussed on a bal- shipment until it arrives at the cus-
customer and acts therefore on of, or estimated arrival of, the ship- ance of optimal cost and service, cor- tomer’s specified final destination,
behalf of the customer. At this ment. responding to the three strategic goals taking into account the special
- safety, aircraft operational reliability aerospace logistics requirements.
and reduction of operating costs.
CHARACTERISTICS OF CSL
• Airbus as Single Point of Contact
for the entire supply chain.
• Competitive freight rates due to
Airbus and European Aeronautic
Defense and Space Company
(EADS) volume discounts.
• On-line Tracking and Tracing
transparency.
• Customisation of the supply
chain, covering all steps from
pick up to customs clearance,
considering service freight
restrictions, special clauses and
exceptions, and defining
handover interfaces.
• Reduction of interfaces
throughout the supply chain.
25
43
TSAF
The “Customised Spares
Logistics” concept is the
result of the long-term
experience in aviation
logistics focused on
customer requirements and
the transport logistics
capability of Airbus Spares
Support and Services.
http://spares.airbus.com
24
43
TSAF
CUSTOMISED SPARESLOGISTICS CUSTOMISED SPARESLOGISTICS
MATERIAL SCOPE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE CSL PROCESS
Customised Spares Logistics can
be used for transportation of any Initially the current supply chain
spares purchased from Airbus. This for shipments from Airbus and
includes Proprietary Parts, Ground suppliers to the final customer des-
Support Equipment, tools, and tination will be analysed. Next, a
supplier parts. It also covers deliv- customised Standard Operation
eries from Hamburg as well as Procedure will be prepared togeth-
drop-shipments. er with a CSL proposal. This will
ensure the performance will match
LEAD TIME BASED the agreed lead times, ensure safe information on the current rates. The rates are passed
PRICING CONCEPT processes and cost-efficient spares shipment status and location. directly on to customers, leading
transport. It includes general con- to reduced transport costs.
According to geographical zones tractual items and all necessary • They also experience a reduction
defined by IATA (map below) a operational details such as respon- in hidden costs, be it through • Since Airbus is responsible for
priority based lead time and pric- sibilities, information required savings for not having to invest the delivery of spares and tools
ing concept is applied for the regarding customs issues etc. After time and capacity in tracking right to customer’s doorstep,
Airbus Customised Spares an initial period of operation, usually and tracing of shipments, or be it there is one single contact for
Logistics concept. Table below between three to six months, all for not having to keep extra the entire supply chain, resulting
shows the different lead times for relevant business figures will be inventory to compensate for in a continuous increase in
shipments ex-Europe to the speci- reviewed by Airbus together with potential lack of spares due to supply chain efficiency.
fied IATA zones. the customer. shipment delays.
• The whole service is backed-up
To get a clear view of the yearly CUSTOMER ADVANTAGES • Customers further profit from by regular benchmark studies
costs, individual business cases can FROM CSL the economies of scale obtained and continuous performance
be prepared according to the ship- by Airbus. These economies of measurements to ensure
ment structure of each customer. Customers benefit from using CSL scale lead to competitive freight optimised operations.
The customer will then receive an in various ways:
individual commercial proposal
before entering into the agreement. • They can rely on scheduled
All invoicing shall be consolidated delivery times with the added
and provided on monthly basis. convenience of on-line, real-time
Conclusion
CONTACT DETAILS
Customised Spares Logistics (CSL)
Andreas Teufel
Director Spares Marketing provides benefits for the entire supply
Spares Support & Services chain. Not only do customers benefit, but
Tel:+49 (40) 5076 2320 also the suppliers and forwarders are able
Fax:+49 (40) 5076 2155 to achieve their promised delivery
andreas.teufel@airbus.com performance. The result is leaner supply
chains, meaning higher efficiency and
Helmut Diekhoff
less wastage for the entire system.
Manager Customised Spares Logistics
Spares Support & Services
Tel:+49 (40) 5076 2577 That can only be of benefit to all!
Fax:+49 (40) 5076 2626
helmut.diekhoff@airbus.com
27
43
TSAF
CUSTOMISED SPARESLOGISTICS
CUSTOMER QUOTE
“As far as we are concerned we only
see advantages [of using Customised
Spares Logistics]. Our freight costs are
lower, leading to economic benefits.
Additionally, Airbus manages the
complete supply chain in cooperation
with the forwarder, which includes the
physical handling of the shipments as
well as the electronic shipment tracking
and coordination. Therefore we do not
need to pay attention to the actual supply
and dispatch of the required spare parts.
As a consequence, we have been able to
decrease our administrative costs. We
only notify Airbus Spares Support and
Services when we require particular
spare parts - that’s all we need to do!”
Martin Schmidt
Director Material & Logistics
Austrian Airlines Technik
(translated from LOGISTIK inside 17/2003)
26
43
TSAF
AIRCRAFT SYSTEM MAINTENANCE AIDS AVAILABLE FROM AIRBUS AIRCRAFT SYSTEM MAINTENANCE AIDS AVAILABLE FROM AIRBUS
Aircraft System Maintenance Aids available from Airbus
A300/A310 Family A330/A340 Family
AIRCRAFT TYPE TITLE ATA ISSUE REFERENCE AIRCRAFT TYPE TITLE ATA ISSUE REFERENCE
A300-600/A310 Autoflight System Operation / Troubleshooting Guidelines 22 APR 03 SEE43/952.2636/03 A330/A340 (all) IDG (Integrated Drive Generator) Servicing Procedure 24 JAN 01 SEE51/953.0616/01
A300 Flap System Trouble Shooting Procedure 27 DEC 88 No reference A330/A340 (all) NBPT Simulation Tool (No Break Power Transfer) 24 2003 GDCOS-SL343/03
A300/A300-600 Flap System / Flap Jamming Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 MAY 89 ST34/0001/89 A330/A340-200 & -300 Cargo Loading System (CLS) Operation / Trouble Shooting Guidelines 25 2003 SEE24/949.4902/03
A300-600 Slat / Flap System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 FEB 97 SEE41-952.0834/97 A330/A340-200 & -300 Cargo Hold Maintenance 25 SEP 00 AI/SR S064//00
A300 Slat System Jam Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 FEB 97 SEE41-952.0835/97 A330/A340 (all) Slat / Flap System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 FRB 97 SEE41/952.0832/97
A300 Flap System Jam Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 FEB 97 SEE41-952.0836/97 A330/A340-200 & -300 Refuel System - Description & Trouble Shooting Guidelines 28 JUN 99 SEE31/951.1398/99
A310 Slat / Flap System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 MAR 98 SEE53-953.1907/98 A330/A340 (all) Hydraulic System Maintenance Practices 29 2002 SEE34/951.2403/02
A310 Spoiler Control Computers Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 AUG 98 SEE53-953.4553/98 A330 (PW/RR) Engine Bleed Air System - Operation/Trouble Shooting Guidelines 36 APR 02 SEE/949.2963/00
A310 Spoiler Control Computers Trouble Shooting Guidelines (for FEDEX only) 27 AUG 98 SEE53/953.6135/98 A330 (GE) Engine Bleed Air System - Operation/Trouble Shooting Guidelines 36 JUN 02 SEE/949.2966/00
A300-600 Spoiler Control Computers Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 AUG 98 SEE53-953.4556/98 A340-200 & -300 Engine Bleed Air System - Operation/Trouble Shooting Tips 36 JUN 99 SEE23/949.2725/99
A300-600 Spoiler Control Computers Trouble Shooting Guidelines (for FEDEX only) 27 AUG 98 SEE53-953.6134/98 A330/A340-200 & -300 Doors & Escape Slide Control System - Operation/Trouble Shooting Guidelines 52 JAN 04 SEE23/949.5096/96
A310-300/A300-600R Trim Tank System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 28 NOV 90 ST22-948.1341/90
A300/A310/A300-600 Hydraulic System Maintenance Practices 29 MAR 99 SEE34-951.0684/99 All Aircraft Families
A310/A300-600 Engine Bleed System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 36 APR 90 ST23/0002/90
TITLE ATA ISSUE REFERENCE
A310/A300-600 Engine Bleed System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 36 JUL 02 SEE23-949.4691/95
Leak Prevention on Hydraulic Tube Fitting 29 2004 GDCOS A002/04
A300B2/B4 Engine Bleed System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 36 JUN 02 SEE23-949.5177/96
(sets of 5)
Hydraulic Systems Maintenance Practices 29 APR 02 SEE34 951.3026/99
A320 Family Fuel Tank Maintenance Practices (except A340-500 & -600) 57 2002 SEA22/943.1409/02
AIRCRAFT TYPE TITLE ATA ISSUE REFERENCE
Delivery conditions for pocket size booklets/brochures/leaflets & posters (posters: by set of 5)
A319/A320/A321 Air Conditioning Trouble Shooting Guidelines 21 2002 SEE22/949.8283/97
A318/A319/A320/A321 Avionics Equipment Ventilation Trouble Shooting Guidelines 21 2002 SEE22/949.7305/99 Free of charge (beyond these figures, the requested quantities will be delivered upon receipt of a purchase order)
A319/A320/A321 CIDS (Cabin Intercommunication Display System) 23 JAN 99 SEE41/952.0797/99
Fleet size 1-3 4-10 11-20 21-30 31-40 41-50 > 50
Trouble Shooting Guidelines
A318/A319/A320/A321 IDG (Integrated Drive Generator) Servicing Procedure 24 JAN 01 SEE51/953.0616/01 Quantity supplied 10 20 30 40 45 50 50
A319 Slide / Slide Raft Arming / Disarming Procedures (for EASY JET only) 25 SEP 03 SEE21/949.7706/03 This information is taken from SIL00-032 dated march 2004.
In the event of any conflict the text of the SIL applies
A318/A319/A320/A321 Slide / Slide Raft Arming / Disarming Procedures 25 OCT 03 SEE21/949.9098/03
A318/A319/A320/A321 Slat / Flap System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 JAN 90 ST34/993.396/89
A318/A319/A320/A321 Slat / Flap System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 27 FEB 97 SEE41/952.0831/97
1 Videotape/1 CD is free of charge for each company. Brochure
A318/A319/A320/A321* Slat / Flap System - System Evolution 27 MAY 97 SEE41/952.2528/97
CDs are sold by set of 3 irrespective of fleet size.
A318/A319/A320/A321 Procedure for Re-greasing A320 Flap Actuators 27 FEB 98 No reference
Video
A318/A319/A320/A321 A320 Family Flight Control System - Elevator Rigging 27 APR 03 GDCOS-S097/03
Issue 2004
Free of charge quanties are provided in accordance
A318/A319/A320/A321 Shark Fin Tool for Easy Flap Adjustment 27 JAN 00 SEE5959.0073/00 CD
with fleet size.Additional quanties are at prices
A318/A319/A320/A321 Hydraulic System Maintenance Practices 29 MAY 99 SEE34/951.1497/99
reflected in the “Airbus Customer Services Catalog”
A320 AIDS Trouble Shooting Guidelines (for TELEDYNE DMU only) 31 JUN 89 ST33/0004/89 (Session 2, paragraph 2.1.2 - “Maintenance and Poster
A318/A319/A320/A321 CFDS - Guidelines for Trouble Shooting using Centralized 31 FEB 96 SE54/953.1211/96
Engineering”).
Fault Display System
A purchase order form is provided in the Catalog.
A319/A320/A321 Braking and Steering System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 32 FEB 03 SEE32/957.0519/03
Twin gear
Requests and associated purchase order are to be
A320 Braking and Steering System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 32 DEC 97 SEE32/957.4606/97
sent to the following address:
(for IAC only) Bogie gear
A319/A320/A321 Engine Bleed Air System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 36 JUN 02 SEE23/949.0229/95 Fabienne Baron
AIRBUS S.A.S.
A319/A320/A321 Vacuum Toilet System Trouble Shooting Guidelines 38 APR. 03 SEE21/949.3269/03
Engineering Services - SEE5 Department
A318/A319/A320/A321 Passenger Door Operation & Maintenance 52 MAY 02 SEE5 956.0214/02
1, rond-point Maurice-Bellonte
31707 BLAGNAC Cedex
(*) In addition to this document, the "SLAT/FLAP SYSTEM – EVOLUTION" brochure is distributed to detail the component and part number
France
evolution versus modification embodiment.
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 40
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 44 25
fabienne.baron@airbus.com
28
A380 ACCOMMODATION AT AIRPORTS
In May 2003, the International Civil Most States which are willing to accommodate
Aviation Organization (ICAO) A380 operations at their airports, and noticeably
Council initiated a twofold Action States having potential alternate airports, may lack
Plan for the introduction of New the background information and international
Large Aircraft (NLA) into international working relationship which seems necessary for the
civil aviation service. application of the ICAO Circular on NLA operations.
In line with the ICAO decision, an NLA Information
The first step was to publish a Circular on NLA Forum website (below) has been created, hosted by
operations at existing airports to provide States the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC).
with information concerning airports facilities and The aim of the website is to provide an easy,
services, air traffic management and flight time-saving and informative access to all the
operations, which should be considered for documentation relevant to NLA. It will facilitate
accommodating NLA operations at existing airports. the exchange of information between States’
Secondly, a review will be undertaken of the current administrations, international organisations, airports,
Annex 14, Aerodromes Volume I, code F provisions, airlines, research organisations and industry.
including their underlying basis, considering the
results of studies within and outside ICAO.
43
TSAF
AIRBUS CUSTOMER SERVICES EVENTS
Customer Services
events
A380
Coming soon
HUMAN FACTORS SYMPOSIUM
Just happened New Delhi, India, 14-16 September
accommodation at airports
Seoul, Korea, 23-25 November
SUPPLIER SUPPORT SYMPOSIUM
Toulouse, France, 2-3 March Airbus will continue the dialogue with its operators at
this forum, discussing human factors aspects with prac-
The event brought together 160 representatives from tical and operational perspectives.
engine manufacturers, major suppliers, BFE suppliers,
small suppliers and distributors. It generated much AIRBUS SPARES & SUPPLIER SERVICES
interest amongst the supplier support community, who REGIONAL SYMPOSIUM
thanked Airbus for organising such an event to share Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, 25-28 October
with them details of Airbus recent developments, expec-
tations from them and vision for the future. This event focuses on the latest developments related to
spares support and services for all Airbus customers of
A330/A340 TECHNICAL SYMPOSIUM the Americas. The conference follows the theme
Athens, Greece, 14-18 June “Reducing cost through supply chain partnerships”.
Working sessions began on Monday morning and WARRANTY CONFERENCE
continued through Friday midday. The sessions, as usual, Toulouse, France, 30 November-2 December
comprised presentations based on actual service issues
affecting the A330/A340 programmes as well as subjects This event will be the second concerning Airbus
of more general interest. Awards for operational excel- warranty processes. A significant number of suppliers
lence were made to Lufthansa, Lan Chile, Korean Air are expected to participate to address open issues and
lines and Srilankan Airlines. positively exchange ideas for the benefit of all parties
involved.
3RD SPARES LOGISTICS CONFERENCE
Hamburg, Germany, 15-16 June 7TH TRAINING SYMPOSIUM
Bangkok, Thailand, 6-10 December
This event was the traditional gathering of Airbus
customers, suppliers, forwarders and representatives of This event will continue with the two separate events
This website will be further developed and
other industries to discuss expert views and concepts, specific to Maintenance Training and Flight Crew
kept up to date on a continuous basis:
plus share experience on supply chain logistics. Training introduced with the 6th symposium, with
Amongst a wide spectrum of logistical aspects, the event which, generally speaking, attendees were highly
http://www.ecac-ceac.org/nla-forum.
focused on the Airbus service of Customised Spares satisfied and both events were perceived as beneficial
Logistics, CSL. and well organised.
30
43
TSAF
31
43
TSAF
FROM THE ARCHIVES 100 YEARS AGO...
100 years ago, on 20 September 1904, the Wright brothers made the first
human flight of more than one kilometre.
Only 25 years later Maitlandand Hegenbergermade the first successful
flight from San Francisco to Hawaii in a Fokker F-VII trimotor. Their flight
covered 3890km.
The following year, the Australian, Charles Kingsford-Smith, also in a
Fokker F-VIIb with three Wright 230hp engines, made the first crossing of
the Pacific Ocean from San Francisco to Brisbane and then on to Sydney.
A flight of some 12,000km in three legs via Hawaii and Suva.
Captain Charles Kingsford-Smith From left to right, J.W. Warner,
with his fellow crew members. radio operator, First Officer Ulm and
navigator H.W.Lyons.
Three months later he made
the first flight from Australia
to New Zealand.
In the following two years,
Kingsford-Smith continued to
make the first round the world
flight via India, London and
New York arriving back at
San Francisco in the same
Fokker VIIb. A round trip of
some 54,000km.
Fokker at this time was the
largest aircraft manufacturer
in the world with factories in
Europe and the USA. However
the success did not last.
Fokker was overtaken by
Douglas Aircraft Company
who had more modern
products. However Douglas
Aircraft became insolvent in
1967. Fokker were declared
bankrupt in 1996 and the
company was finally wound
up in May 2004.
The “Southern Cross” on arrival in Hawaï on 1st June 1928
32
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THAER WTIOCRLLED
Customer Support Centres
Training centres
Spares centres / Regional warehouses
Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
RCSM location Country
Macau S.A.R. China
Madrid Spain
Manchester United Kingdom
Manila Philippines
Mauritius Mauritius
Memphis United States of America
Mexico City Mexico
Milan Italy
Minneapolis United States of America
Monastir Tunisia
Montreal Canada
Moscow Russia
Mumbai India
Nanchang China
Nanjing China
New Castle Australia
New York United States of America
Ningbo China
Noumea New Caledonia
Palma de Mallorca Spain
Paris France
Philadelphia United States of America
Phoenix United States of America
Pittsburgh United States of America
Port of Spain Trinidad and Tobago
Qingdao China
Quito Ecuador
Rome Italy
San Francisco United States of America
San Salvador El Salvador
Santiago Chile
Sao Paulo Brazil
Seoul South Korea
Shanghai China
Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Shenzhen China
Shenyang China
Singapore Singapore
Sydney Australia
Taipei Taiwan
Tashkent Uzbekistan
Tehran Iran
Tokyo Japan
Toronto Canada
Tulsa United States of America
Tunis Tunisia
Valetta Malta
Ventiane Laos
Verona Italy
Vienna Austria
Washington United States of America
Xi'an China
Zurich Switzerland
43
TSAF
Customer support
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Philippe Bordes
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3464
CHINA
Ron Bollekamp
Director Customer Support
Tel: +86 10 804 86161
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT
ADMINISTRATION RCSM location Country
Jean-Philippe Guillon
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates
Director
Algiers Algeria
Resident Customer Support Administration Amman Jordan
Amsterdam Netherlands
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02
Athens Greece
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Auckland New Zealand
Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei
Bangalore India
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Bangkok Thailand
Airbus has its main Spares centre in Hamburg, Beirut Lebanon
Brussels Belgium
and regional warehouses in Frankfurt,
Buenos Aires Argentina
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Cairo Egypt
Casablanca Morocco
Charlotte United States of America
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Chengdu China
AOG Technical and Spares calls Colombo Sri Lanka
Copenhagen Denmark
in North America should be addressed to: Dalian China
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Damascus Syria
Delhi India
Fax: +1 (703) 729 4373 Denver United States of America
Derby United Kingdom
Detroit United States of America
AOG Technical and Spares calls outside
Dhaka Bangladesh
North America should be addressed to: Doha Qatar
Dubai United Arab Emirates
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 3001/3002/3003
Dublin Ireland
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 3011/3012/3013 Duluth United States of America
Dusseldorf Germany
Frankfurt Germany
Airbus Training centre Toulouse, France Florence Italy
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Guangzhou China
Hangzhou China
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 20 94
Hanoi Vietnam
Helsinki Finland
Hong Kong S.A.R. China
Airbus Training subsidiaries
Indianapolis United States of America
Miami, USA - Florida Istanbul Turkey
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Jakarta Indonesia
Jinan China
Fax: +1 (305) 871 46 49 Johannesburg South Africa
Beijing, China Karachi Pakistan
Katowice Poland
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia
Fax: +86 10 80 48 65 76 Kuwait city Kuwait
Lanzhou China
Larnaca Cyprus
AIRBUS TECHNICAL AOG CENTER (AIRTAC) Lisbon Portugal
London United Kingdom
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Louisville United States of America
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Los Angeles United States of America
support.airtac@airbus.com Luton United Kingdom
33
www.airbusworld.com
Over a million pages of information, now online.
We could write pages and pages on how we can make personalised details and you can even cut and paste any
your business information management more cost effective. relevant information into your own
But why hunt through endless filing cabinets when with documents. Don’t go through the
Airbus On-Line Services you get rapid, up to date access long haul to find what you want,
to all our technical data? It’s simple and easy to use. visit www.airbusworld.com instead.
All subscribers have totally secure access to all their Airbus. Setting the standards.
