E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
6
4
T
S
A
F
FAST46_COUVval_v7.qxp:couv FAST 46 22/07/10 10:23 Page 2
FAST
46
A U G U S T 2 0 1 0
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
5thTechnical Data symposium Material, Logistics, Suppliers
The fifth Technical Data symposium took place and Warranty symposium
with the participation of more than 150 atten - This symposium will be held in Paris, France
dees, including 60 different airlines from all from 25thto 27thOctober, 2010.
around the world. Airbus will present the latest developments and
In line with the theme of the symposium, initiatives in the material, logistics, suppliers
‘Delivering Innovative Solutions’, more than and warranty domains, that have been deve-
30 different presentations, demos and work - loped based on the close and productive rela-
shops, covering solutions for every single key tion ship with our customers and suppliers. The
area of technical data, were shown. Airbus new suite of Flight Hour Services solu tions
customers fully validated Airbus vision for will also be presented. These services have
Technical Data and highlighted the exceptional been developed to help airlines increase their
networking opportunity that an event like this aircraft availability and reliability, whilst de -
represents with strong encouragements to keep creasing maintenance risks and investment.
up the good work in the future. The airline and MRO markets are constantly
evolving and thus require innovative and
9thA330/A340 Family symposium
flexible solutions. Innovation is a key driver for
This event, recently held in Berlin, Germany,
Airbus, not only when building aircraft, but
gathered 177 persons representing airlines, lea -
also when supporting its customers’ opera tions.
sing organisations, MRO (Maintenance Repair
Airbus will continue to drive the deploy ment of
and Overhaul) organisations and suppliers.
new supply and logistics services to gether with
Airbus customers acknow ledged the good pro -
the customer and supplier com munity, shaping
gress made by Airbus on some major topics
the future together and delivering world-class
since the previous symposium, held in Dubai.
support to its airline operators. The invitations
Airbus presented six ‘Awards for Operational
have been sent out.
Excellence’ to: Korean Air, Asiana Airlines,
Swiss, China Airlines, Etihad Airways and A380 symposium
Qatar Airways. This second A380 symposium will be held in
Many technical and non-technical subjects Singapore from 15th to 19th November 2010. It
were raised during the airline caucus. Airbus will review in-service experience and progress
set its priorities for the coming months. since the first symposium, focusing on major
open issues, associated support plans and
Upgrade Services’ team was at the Aircraft
implications for future operators.
Interiors Expo, Hamburg, Germany
The formal invitation letters, as well as the
Airbus Upgrade Services introduced an ‘Expo
preliminary agenda, have been sent out.
premiere’ this year, the ‘Product Information
Symposiums are held for each Airbus program me
Session’. This session gathers a series of pre-
every two years and target airline engine ering
sentations on innovative new products such as
and maintenance managers. The prime function
the enhanced cabin for the A320 Family, mood
of these meetings are to enable
lighting, the new trend for premium economy
two-way communication regarding actual
and the flexible cabin concept.
in-servi ce issues, as well as topics of more
Please contact Airbus Customer Services for
general interest.
details on new innovations and products sui -
table for retrofit to your fleet.
64
TSAF
FAST46_COUVval_v7.qxp:couv FAST 46 22/07/10 10:23 Page 3
JA UU LG YU S 2T 0 02 70 1 0
4406
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
Events
Alternative fuels
A flight path towards sustainable aviation
Paul NASH
Ross WALKER
Nicolas MOUNEY
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD Jet fuel contamination with FAME
Page layout: Quat’coul (Fatty Acid Methyl Ester)
World jet fuel supply
Cover:
Greener. Cleaner. Quieter. Smarter. Marie FROMENT
Authorization for reprint of FAST Magazine articles should be requested
from the editor at the FAST Magazine e-mail address given below
Repair Design Approval
Customer Services Communications
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88 Structure damage assessment
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
using Repair Manager
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer: Amadio Alain BALEIX
Colin SMART
FAST Magazine may be read on Internet
http://www.airbus.com/en/services/publications/
under ‘Quick references’ Head-Up Display system
ISSN 1293-5476
Enhanced operations’ situational awareness
© AIRBUS S.A.S. 2010. AN EADS COMPANY Eric ALBERT
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter “Magazine”), you accept on behalf of SPICE
your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted by the
delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of information. The future galleys
This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified nor
Daniel PERCY
reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus S.A.S. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive or
other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information involves Galleys
a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
Improving over 40 years’ old galley design
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation Customer Services Worldwide
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus S.A.S can Around the clock... Around the world
be contacted to provide further details. Airbus S.A.S shall assume no liability for any
damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains, even
if Airbus S.A.S has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence is
governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals of
Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction.
Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 1
2
8
14
24
31
36
37
This issue of FAST Magazine has been printed
on paper produced without using chlorine, to reduce
Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: waste and help conserve natural resources.
Airbus Photographic Library, exm company, Airbus France Every little helps!
1
ALTERNATIVE FUELS - A FLIGHT PATH TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 2
Alternative fuels
A flight path
towards sustainable aviation
Global economics’ development is dependent whole, has voluntarily committed to tough targets
upon efficient and worldwide transportation including ‘Carbon Neutral Growth’ by 2020 and a
means, to enable the distribution of goods, ser- reduction of CO emissions by 50% in 2050,
2
vices and business interaction through people. compared to 2005.
Aviation is the optimized solution for worldwide To improve its environmental footprint, Airbus is
cooperation. working innovatively in key areas such as product
Airbus is an eco-efficient organisation and wishes technology improvements, Air Traffic Manage -
aviation to flourish whilst reducing its impact on ment (ATM) and developing solutions for low car-
the environment. Today, aviation is recognized as bon lifecycle energy sources through alternative
a key industry for global economic development fuels for aviation.
and currently contributes to 8% of the global To achieve this, Airbus is actively investigating
Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Conversely, avi- alternative energy sources for aviation and launched
ation only contributes to 2% of man-made CO its ‘Alternative Fuels Roadmap’ early 2008, propos-
2
emissions. Over the past 40 years, the industry ing Research and Technology (R&T) activities,
has improved its fuel efficiency and reduced its flight demonstrations , alternative fuels’ approvals
related CO emissions by 70%. The industry, as a and targets for bio-fuel commercialisation.
2
Paul NASH Ross WALKER Nicolas MOUNEY
Head of New Energies Engineering Programme Alternative Fuels and
Airbus Environmental Affairs Manager Alternative Fuels Acoustics Senior Engineer
Airbus Engineering CoC Power Plant
Airbus Engineering
2
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 3
ALTERNATIVE FUELS - A FLIGHT PATH TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
What are THE ‘WHY’
alternative fuels?
Considering the likely depletion
of petroleum fossil fuels, along
THE ALTERNATIVE FUEL SOURCES with the believed impact of CO
2
on the climate, Airbus is com -
There are at least three types of mitted to improving its fuel burn /
‘drop-in’ alternative fuels that meet CO emissions’ perfor mance.
2
the performance of non-renewable Aviation currently repre sents ap -
(fossil) jet fuels - giving a slightly proximately 12% of the world
higher energy content (reducing transport fuel consumption (or 7 to
fuel burn), flash point (temperature 8% of the global petroleum
at which fuel vapours will ignite - consumption). In addition to this,
critical for safety during ground jet fuel price volatility remains a
handling/refuelling) and a lower major cause of concern for the
freezing point (potentially increa - airlines, as fuel typically accounts
sing the effective operational enve - for approximately 40% of their
lope of the aircraft). Bio-fuels are a operating costs (in 2008).
range of fuels which are derived
from renewable biomass. The term THE ‘NEED’
covers solid bio mass, liquid fuels and
bio-gases. The bio-fuels and some Technically, conventional jet fuel
fossil fuels make synthetic fuels: or kerosene (also known as JET
• The Fischer-Tropsch (FT) A1), has specific characteristics
i n f o r m a t i o n
process gives a synthetic fuel, that are necessary and remarkably
made from natural gas (Gas To suitable for flight conditions. It has ‘Drop-in’ fuels
Liquid - GTL), coal (Coal To a good energy content, a low free -
Fuels that can be mixed with
Liquid - CTL) and biomass zing point (below minus 40°C) and
existing jet fuels without requiring
(Biomass To Liquid - BTL) such it is stable and reliable. Alternative
any change to the supply
as farm waste or woodchip/ fuels for aviation must meet these
infrastructure, airframe or engines
forestry waste. (GTL, CTL and characteristics. There fore, Airbus
and provide the same or better
BTL are collectively known as in the short-to-medium term, is
performance.
XTL). This process was concentrating its efforts on those
developed in the 1920s. alternative fuels which are termed
It is a set of chemical reactions ‘drop-in’. These types of fuels will
that convert a mixture of carbon enable the existing fleets to benefit
monoxide and hydrogen into by reducing their CO emissions,
2
liquid hydrocarbons. as well as eliminating the environ -
• Hydrogenated Biomass Oils mental impacts that would be
(HBO) fuels are made using the incurred by changes to the supply
animal fats, oils from plants like and airport infrastructures.
4 key strategic approaches
camelina, jatropha and salicornia,
to reduce CO2emissions
or oils from algae.This process
de-oxygenatesthe biomass oils
or fats to produce paraffins
which can then be reformed CO2
if nothing
by a hydro-treatment to make CO2 1
2
.
.
T
a
e
n
c
d
h
3
n
.
o
A
lo
d
g
d
ie
it
s
io
,
n
o
a
p
l
e
t
r
e
a
c
t
h
io
n
n
o
s
lo
,
g
A
y
T M
and bio-fuels is done
aviation kerosene. 4. Economic measures
• Hydrotreated Cellulosic Fibre
(HCF) fuels are made using
cellulosic biomass such as Carbon
neutral
forestry and farm waste or growth
2020
switch grass, to name a few. 100
This process converts the
cellulosic material into a Minus
solution which is then fermented 50% CO2
by 2050
into alcohols and then reformed
by a hydro-treatment to make
2005 2010 2020 2030 2040 2050
aviation kerosene.
3
ALTERNATIVE FUELS - A FLIGHT PATH TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
64
TSAF
POTENTIAL SUSTAINABLE
FEEDSTOCKS
Cellulosic fibres
such as
forestry waste,
wheat stubble
or switch
grass.
Oil from jatropha seeds
is used to make
bio-fuels in tropical
regions such as South
America, where it grows
naturally Because salicornia can be grown using
and in plantations. saltwater, it can be cultivated
Jatropha is currently on coastal lands unsuitable
being promoted for conventional crops. Its seeds
for bio-fuels across contain high levels of unsaturated oil,
developing countries. making it ideal for bio-fuel.
4
-
MPPBA
fo ysetruoC
arielisarB
oãçaicossA
serotudorP
od
osnaM
oãhniP
ed
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 4
PROCESS FOR TRANSFORMATION
Process
for transformation
Other alternative fuel possibilities
have been analysed but are cur -
rently not seen to be a solution for
XTLs: Coal, HCFs: the aviation, including alcohols
natural gas, Natural
which contain 35% lower energy
any biomass cellulosic
(CTL, GTL, BTL) fibres content and Fatty Acid Methyl
Esters (FAME) with 10% lower
HBOs:
Crude petroleum Syn-gas (CO/H2) Natural - oils, Liquified to energy content and a freezing point
production fats, greases sugars at -5°C (see following article on
‘FAME’). Airbus has extensively
Crude Fischer-tropsch De-oxygenation Fermentation
vacuum column synthesis studied the use of hydrogen and
does not see this as a solution
Vacuumgas oil Paraffins Alcohols
Selective Selective Selective Selective in the short-to-medium term,
Hydro-treatment Hydro-treatment Hydro-treatment Hydro-treatment without major changes in the
processes processes processes processes
aircraft design, the support of
infrastructures and tech niques to
industrialize its production.
Light fuels
Straight run
Kerosene/Jet A1, Synthetic Paraffinic
Product separation
diesel, naphtha, Kerosene (SPK) /Jet A1
vacuum bottoms
Diesel
Alternative fuels options
for commercial aviation
Algae are simple
water-based
organisms. Algae
capture carbon dioxide and use
sunlight to convert
it into oxygen and Camelina is a flowering plant
biomass which can native from Northern Europe
then be converted and Central Asia, traditionally
into oil for use grown for vegetable oil. It
in bio-fuels. needs little water or fertilizers,
so it can be grown on
marginal agricultural lands
without competing with food
crops. It is also used as a
rotation crop for wheat to
increase the health of the soil.
64
TSAF
ALTERNATIVE FUELS - A FLIGHT PATH TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
5
)GATA(
puorG
noitcA
tropsnarT
riA
:ecruoS
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 5
Benefits
Feedstock growth
Plant matter absorbs CO 2 as it C02
grows. When it is converted into
fuel and burnt, CO is released.
2
The net result is that the CO
2
Flight
absorbed and released can partially
cancel each-other out, to achieve
C02
near-neutral emissions.
Transport
Challenges
C02 C02
Processing Distribution
SUSTAINABILITY at airports
C02
The biggest challenge is producing Refining
sustainable feedstock in sufficient
quantity, in order to provide the
large quantities of fuel required.
Airbus believes that solutions for including the most interested
Lifecycle emissions
the alternative fuel production - the airlines).This is to say that
from bio-fuels
must reflect the local flora and a cross industry approach is
habitat, ensuring that the local essential. All these parties have to
solutions reflect each region’s work hand in hand to reach this
natural resources and provide local common goal.
employment.
PRICE
Airbus is focusing its research
from sustainable plants or biomass Last but not least, price plays a
feedstocks that do not compete pivotal role for the alternative fuels’
with land, food, nor water re- commercial success. Alternative
sources. To ensure this, Airbus is fuels must be commercially viable
working with the Roundtable on and affordable, not only during the
Sustainable Bio-fuels (RSB) to production phase but also for the
ensure it proposes sustainable end user. For example, in 2008,
solutions. approximately 40% of the airline
RSB website: costs were linked to fuel purchases.
http://cgse.epfl.ch/page65660.html Alternative fuels must therefore be
competitive with fossil based fuels.
RESEARCH AND TECHNOLOGY (R&T)
Airbus
The development of bio-fuels
achievements
requires an analysis and imple -
mentation that will depend on the
governments' support through On February 1st, 2008, Airbus com -
policy (prioritisation of energy pleted the world’s first ever flight
types) and incentives. Airbus is by a commercial jet (A380) using
working with cross industry groups synthetic liquid jet-fuel made from
to speed-up the commercialisation natural gas (GTL), similar to con -
of the bio-fuel production, based ventional jet fuel in terms of CO
2
on R&T. emissions but has virtually no
sulphur and is better for local air
INVESTMENT quality. Thanks to these and later
tests, 50% blends of GTL and BTL
Investors finance the commer cia - were officially authorized for pas -
lisation of bio-fuels across the va - senger flights. Qatar Airways flew
lue chain (farmers, refiners, airports, the world’s first commercial ser -
transportation and distribu tion, vice with GTL in October 2009 on
an A340-600.
ALTERNATIVE FUELS - A FLIGHT PATH TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
Qatar Airways Chief Executive The role of Airbus
Officer, Akbar AL BAKER, who
was on-board the flight, said: Airbus is playing a catalyst role in
“Qatar Airways is proud to be as - the alternative fuels’ development
sociated with this consortium and by continuously working with in -
to become the world’s first airline dustrial partners to fully explore
to use this new fuel techno logy on the potential value to supply the
a commercial passenger flight.” aviation industry.
The second commercial flight Airbus is:
using GTL fuel was performed in • Working with airlines to
April 2010 by United Airlines on implement projects and convince
an A319. them of the benefits of such a
GTL fuels are a good step towards development,
bio-fuels and these demonstrations • Providing decision-makers with
triggered lots of interest from relevant bio-fuel data,
airlines for bio-fuel use in the near • Developing research
future. Airbus focuses on its imple - programmes (for example algae,
mentation. bacteria, etc.) in collaboration
To carry out engineering, eco - with universities,
nomic analysis and to move into • Participating in sustainability
the development of sustainable pilot phases and analysis
bio-fuels, Qatar Airways, in colla - (involvement in the Roundtable
boration with Airbus, launched in Sustainability on Bio-fuels),
January 2010 the bio-fuel value • Supporting the approval process
chain to commercialize bio-fuels. for new bio-fuels within the fuel
A detailed implemen tation plan for specification approval bodies
the bio-fuel production, an invest - ASTM / DEF-STAN (ASTM
ment strategy plan and market International Worldwide
analysis are being deve loped in this Standards Organisation/UK
project. Defense Standards body).
In the view of the continuous col -
laboration with airlines, Airbus and Today, Airbus is supporting many
the Brazilian airline ‘TAM’ an - national, European and interna tio -
nounced in April 2010, a bio-fuel nal R&T initiatives including (but
flight with an A320 with CFMI not limited to):
engines, using 50% blend of • CALIN - Research work which
Brazilian jatropha. A letter of in tent aims to identify and evaluate a
was also signed to set up the bio- number of alternatives to
fuel value chain in Brazil to com - kerosene for the short, medium,
mercialise the bio-fuel produc tion. and long term.
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 6
Qatar Airways first flight
with GTL / Pre-flight London
Gatwick reception
From left to right:
-Gary WOODWARD,
Shell General Manager Operations
Technical & Supply Aviation
-Dr. Eulian ROBERTS,
Qatar Science & Technology Park
Managing Director
-Akbar AL BAKER,
Qatar Airways Chief Executive
Officer
-Rainer OHLER,
Airbus Head of Public Affairs
and Communications
-Phil HARRIS,
Rolls Royce Civil Aerospace Senior
Vice President Customer Business
-Ali AL SHARSHANI,
Shell Associate Researcher.
United Airlines first flight
with GTL on an A319
Joe BURNS,
United Airlines Flight Captain
and Mark BOURDEAU,
United Airlines Fuel Technical
Services.
6
7
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 7
ALTERNATIVE FUELS - A FLIGHT PATH TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE AVIATION
• ALFA-BIRD - Overview of
w e b s i t e
potential alternative fuels,
assessment for suitability for
“Find out more about Aeronautics Research in Europe
aircraft, technical analysis and
environment http://www.acare4europe.org
future alternative fuel strategies.
and alternative fuels”
• CAER (in preparation) - Clean Sky, a ‘Joint Technology Initiative’
Establish a French aeronautic Airbus and eco-efficiency http://www.cleansky.eu
alternative fuel programme. http://www.airbus.com/en/corporate/ International Civil Aviation Organisation
• SWAFEA - Forum for the ethics/environment http://www.icao.int/env
community (industry, policy,
Air Transport Action Group IPCC Report on Aviation and the
science and research) to meet
http://www.atag.org Global Atmosphere
and discuss state-of-the-art in
Publication http://www.ipcc.ch
alternative fuels and energy for
‘Beginners guide to aviation to bio-fuels’
aviation. Sustainable Aviation Fuel User Group
http://www.enviro.aero
http://www.safug.org/
(ATAG sponsored website)
Optimum land for growing
sustainable aviation bio-fuels
Circles indicate potential
locations for bio-fuel
feedstock growth
(indicative estimate)
CONTACT DETAILS
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 29 31
Algae
Paul NASH Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 25
Jatropha Head of New Energies ross.walker@airbus.com
Airbus Environmental Affairs
Camelina Nicolas MOUNEY
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 80 26
Alternative Fuels and
Source: Air Transport Action Group Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 13 09
Acoustics Senior Engineer
paul.nash@airbus.com
CoC Power Plant
Ross WALKER Airbus Engineering
Engineering Programme Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 48 37
Manager Alternative Fuels Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 08
Conclusion Airbus Engineering nicolas.mouney@airbus.com
Aviation has a limited spectrum flights will be powered by sustainable
of solutions compared to the other bio-fuels by 2030. The Airbus roadmap
transport industries. Research and test has set out a number of steps towards
flights have shown that synthetic bio-fuels achieving this goal, and already
can replace fossil fuels on today’s aircraft, succeeded in demonstrating that use of
without any modification. The biggest Biomass To Liquid (BTL) is viable, subject
challenge is producing sustainable to available and sustainable feedstocks.
feedstock in sufficient quantity and at a Airbus is acting as a catalyst to bring
commercially viable cost, in order to together the value chain and to attempt
provide a feasible fuel for aviation. to speed-up the commercialisation and
Even though the industry has come a long visibility of aviation bio-fuels, as a solution
way in understanding alternative fuels, towards “Greener, Cleaner, Quieter and
there is some way to go before these Smarter” skies.
different fuels become viable and widely Cross industry collaboration, sustainability
available. Airbus foresees that 30% of all and price are key!
7
JET FUEL CONTAMINATION WITH FAME - WORLD JET FUEL SUPPLY
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 8
Jet fuel contamination
with FAME
(Fatty Acid Methyl Ester)
World jet fuel supply
This article explains the impact of FAME pointed at is the use of fossil fuel-based energy
contamination in jet fuel, the on-going studies for sources. This, added to the global increase of fuel
aircraft clearance with higher levels of FAME prices and the threat of oil depletion has led a drive
concentration and the operational recommen - to develop and use alternate fuels in the transport
dations. FAME fuels are manufactured from bio - industry. Worldwide, governments are regulating
mass and have properties that are similar to the introduction of bio-fuel compo nents in ground
petroleum diesel. This fuel makes a good fuel for transportation fuels. For example, Europe has
road transportation means but is not appropriate mandated that automotive diesel must include a
for air transport, due to lower energy content and 5% bio-fuel component (Directive 2003/30/EC).
higher freezing point. Similarly, in the U.S.A., bio-diesel use has been
For a few years, the awareness of the human increasing (following Energy Policy Act of 2005).
impact on climate change and ways to reduce it, The bio-fuel component usually added to diesel
have been identified. One of the key areas being fuels are Fatty Acid Methyl Esters (FAME).
Marie FROMENT
Fuel Systems Engineer
Airbus Customer Services Engineering
8
JET FUEL CONTAMINATION WITH FAME - WORLD JET FUEL SUPPLY
64
TSAF
n o t e s
In organic chemistry,
transesterificationis the process
of exchanging the organic group
R" of an ester with the organic
group R' of an alcohol.
These reactions are often
catalysed by the addition
of an acid or base catalyst.
O R
H C—O O H C—O—H O—CH 2 + 2 + 3
HC—O R 3 HO—CH HC—O—H 3 R
3
H C—O H C—O—H O
2 2
R
O
Rapeseed Sunflower
9
—
—
—
—
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 9
What are This reaction for bio-diesel com -
ponent production is shown in
the bio-fuel
figure 1. In this reaction, one mo -
components? lecule of oil or fat reacts with three
molecules of a low carbon number
alcohol in the presence of a base
The term ‘bio-fuel’ (read also the catalyst. Three molecules of fatty
previous FAST article - ‘Alter na - acid esters and one molecule of
tive fuels’) is used for any fuel glyce rine are produced. The low
derived from a biomass source carbon number alcohol is usually
through a conversion process methanol, but can also be ethanol
which can be biological, thermal, or higher alcohols. The ‘R’ repre -
chemical, or a combination of sents the fatty acid carbon chains
these, to form one or more pro - associated with the natural oil or
ducts. The most common bio-fuel fat.
components currently avai lable in
the transport industry are: Bio- Manufacturers have the methanol
ethanol, bio-diesel from tran- react with an oil (triglyceride) such
sesterification of vegetable oils and as vegetable oil (typically derived
fats, and bio-gas from ana erobic from sunflower or rapeseed oil),
digestion. animal fat or used cooking oil to
produce FAME and glycerol. The
The bio-fuel component, Fatty final properties are similar to
Acid Methyl Ester (FAME), is petroleum diesel, which makes
ma nufactured using a chemical them good alternate fuels for road
pro cess called transesterification. transport.
Example of the FAME manufacturing
process by transesterification
Figure 1
H=Hydrogen
Catalyse O=Oxygen
HO-CH=Methanol
3
C=Carbon chains
R=Fatty Acid Carbon chains
JET FUEL CONTAMINATION WITH FAME - WORLD JET FUEL SUPPLY
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 10
FAME Jet fuel
Only
Only FAME jet fuel
Potential FAME
and jet fuel mixed up
The blends (mixture) are com- and the possibility of airport sup -
Multi-product transportation
monly referred to as ‘Bx’ where ‘x’ plies becoming contaminated,
Figure 2 designates the volume percen tage both, EASA (SIB N°2009-1) and
of FAME. As an example, B5 FAA (SAIB NE-09-25) have
contains 5% FAME and B10 issued information bulletins on
contains 10% FAME. this issue. Operators have been
informed about the potential issue
Worldwide, multi-product supply of jet aviation fuel being conta -
systems such as pipelines, trucks, minated by FAME and that limited
trains and ships often transport FAME contamination of airport
different grades of fuels and fluids, fuel supplies has occurred.
using protective measures that are
designed to minimize cross-conta - FAME (from bio-blended-diesels)
mination. However, as FAME has in jet fuel can have the following
the property to ‘stick’ to surfaces, issues which are of concern for
small traces of FAME can be aircraft operations:
found in jet fuel; this conta- • Corrosion - formic and acetic
mination having been picked up by acids, glycerine, water and
the jet fuel when following a batch methanol can be present,
of fuel containing FAME in the • Cracking or softening of
same transport system. There is Elastomer seals,
also the possibility of carry-over • Presence of alkaline earth metals
of bio-blended-diesel (containing with an effect on engine
FAME) at the product interfaces, components,
which occur in multi-product • High freezing point
pipelines (refer to figure 2) which (freezing at -5C),
can then lead to jet fuel (JET A1) • Thermal stability -
contaminated with FAME. polymerisation can occur,
leading to a filter blockage.
The most common bio-fuel types,
currently in use in road transport, are To minimize the potential impact
not suitable for use as aviation fuels of FAME contamination on jet
because they do not meet jet fuel fuel supply, the global jet fuel
specification requirements (e.g. speci fication Defstan 91-91 was
freezing point, thermal sta bi lity, etc.) amen ded to permit up to 5mg/kg
(5ppm - parts per million) of
The current FAME con tent, being the lowest
detection limit of current mea-
situation
surement me thods (refer to the
for air transport ‘FAME current existing measu -
rement methods’ paragraph). For
example, one litre of B5 in 10,000
In response to concerns about litres of jet fuel renders the jet fuel
FAME contamination of jet fuel ‘unfit for use’.
10
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 11
JET FUEL CONTAMINATION WITH FAME - WORLD JET FUEL SUPPLY
As the use of bio-fuel components the automatic methods. Similar
increases, the current level of results have been noted regarding
5ppm will be difficult to manage. the effect on the water solubility
Consequently, if contaminated fuel properties. n o t e s
(above 5ppm) is detected on an air -
craft, then at the present time The testing showed no incom- Due to effects on exposure
operators have to defuel, then re - patibility problems between FAME of the engines and APUs to high
fuel the aircraft, to ensure no and approved biocides or additives FAME concentration, further
FAME contamination of aircraft (such as anti-icing). recommendations, as provided
systems. As a result of this risk, The influence of FAME on micro - by the appropriate engine and APU
engine, APU (Auxiliary Power biological contamination develop - manufacturer, will also need
Unit) and aircraft manufacturers, ment (refer to FAST 38 ) has also to be applied to allow the aircraft
have agreed that up to 30ppm, been studied. The impact linked to operation.
FAME conta mination may be per - concentration (increased up to
mitted, subject to stringent limi - 400ppm) have been tested and
tations. There is a limitation al - preliminary conclusions show it
lowing two subsequent fuel uplifts does not have a significant impact
reaching up to 30ppm (operation to any additional micro biological
with two refuels allowed at development.
airframe level). After these two The programme includes the
fuel uplifts, then the fuel on-board FAME material compatibility with
will have to be below 5ppm of an exhaustive list of materials. The
FAME. results of this testing will deter -
mine the clearance of 100ppm due
Current testing to the impact of FAME on aircraft
systems. If any results are not
with FAME in
suitable, maintenance plans would
aviation jet fuels need to be introduced, or other
contingency measures taken, on a
material by material basis.
A specific programme has been Testing results should be available
put in place in order to provide by the end of 2010.
emergency clearance of 100ppm
contamination of FAME in jet fuel.
This programme is led by the
Energy Institute and is sponsored
n o t e s
by airframe, engine manufacturers,
oil companies, pipeline companies,
ASTM International is the industry
government ministries, bio-fuel
organisation that defines the
producers and military agencies.
consensus on fuels. ASTM
The aim is to perform and analyze
standards are the minimum
all the testing requirements in or -
accepted values for properties
der to confirm the compatibility in
of the fuel.
terms of the specification of jet
fuel with FAME contamination up
to 100ppm.
For example, an engine endurance
test has started at the beginning of
September 2009 and has com ple -
ted several hundred cycles. It is ex-
pec ted that the testing will be
analysed by the middle of 2010.
No significant differences at 100
and 400ppm levels have been no -
ticed in the fuel freezing point with
either the manual freezing point
method (ASTM D2386) or any of
11
JET FUEL CONTAMINATION WITH FAME - WORLD JET FUEL SUPPLY
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:03 Page 12
AIRBUS RECOMMENDATIONS • Samples of fuel to be taken in
IN CASE OF JET FUEL the aircraft tanks (sample
CONTAMINATION WHEN FAME volume in the order of 5 litres),
IS DETECTED • Confirmation of gauging system
operation (due to potential
In the event of a fuel uplift of jet deposits on the probes)
fuel, where FAME contamination by veri fying the max wet
with a concentration higher than capacitance values (confirmation
5ppm is detected (refer to of correct gauging),
paragraph ‘Current testing with • Lack of external fuel leaks.
FAME in aviation jet fuels’), then After the two refuels, if the aircraft
it is advi sed that Airbus be fuel is contaminated with FAME
contacted for further dispatch. above 5ppm, the aircraft would
then have to be defueled down to
The dispatch limitations detailed ‘unpumpable’ before refuelling.
below and the test requirements are
still being refined and reviewed as If uplifted fuel still contains more
further data becomes available than 30ppm FAME, then no dis -
from industry testing. patch will be accepted and the
tanks must be flushed by defuel/
Operation with aircraft fuel conta - refuel operations. This may involve
mination levels up to 30ppm is al - more than one defuel/refuel cycle,
lowed at airframe level for up to before the dispatch will be allowed
two refuels but would require: (refer to figure 3).
Figure 3
Test of aircraft fuel due to suspected contamination with FAME:
- A fuel sample
- Test method (Shell Research Ltd.)
START
2 dimensional gas chromatography methods: RTS report GS.06.50289 or the BP GC-MS method
Between Above
No further 0 and 5 ppm Level of FAME 30 ppm No dispatch allowed:
action contamination 1) Follow propulsion systems, APU manufacturers
of aircraft fuel recommendations and contact them for further advice
2) Follow below recommendations and contact Airbus
Between for further advice.
5 and 30 ppm - Defuel to unpumpable all tanks
- Refuel with clean fuel to maximum capacity (3)
- Defuel (3)
- Refuel with clean fuel (3)
- Check gauging system operation (1)
For first refuel after notification (or aircraft already refueled) For third refuel: - Take fuel sample from near engine inlet
the aircraft can be dispatched if the following actions No dispatch (engine fuel filter) (2)
are completed: allowed
- Record FAME level in aircraft technical log
- Take samples from the tank drains as per AMM - 5 litres minimum (2)
- Record FAME contaminated fuel quantity uplifted
- Check gauging system operation (1)
Report to Airbus
(1) Check on probes’ capacitance reading - check if any probes are
exceeding the maximum wet capacitance values as per Airbus documentation.
For second refuel the aircraft can be dispatched if: (2) Sample size may also be driven by engine requirements. Samples need
- Confirm aircraft fuel with FAME concentration less than 30 ppm
to be taken from both sides of the aircraft. Samples are to be taken in a new
- Record FAME level in aircraft tech log
- Take sample from tank drains - 5 litres minimum (2) clear storage jar. Sample equipment should be thoroughly cleaned before
- Record FAME contaminated fuel quantity uplifted samples are taken from any tank to avoid cross contamination. If a sample
- Perform external check for leakage from drain masts and structure contains evidence of tank coatings, contact Airbus since tank access
- Check gauging system operation (1)
may be required at some point to check if damage has occurred
Report to Airbus to coatings (Ref AMM 12-32-28).
(3) Will ensure most of tank surface is washed with clean fuel.
12
13
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 13
JET FUEL CONTAMINATION WITH FAME - WORLD JET FUEL SUPPLY
FAME current Energy Institute, however, it is a
difficult and expensive process and
existing
there are only a few laboratories in
measurement the world which are able to run this i n f o r m a t i o n
analysis.
methods
Laboratories carrying
One part of the programme, being out the GC-MS method
led by the Energy Institute, is to (IP PM-DY/09 test)
One of the current difficulties en -
develop a rapid detection method for FAME down to
countered, linked to the 5ppm
that can be used in the field. One 5ppm level
limitation, is the ability to test for
method, under study, is based upon • Intertek - Sunbury (UK)
the presence of FAME at this level.
the Fourier Transform Infra-Red • Intertek - Thurrock (UK)
Since 5ppm is barely detectable,
(FTIR) technology and might be - • Intertek - Antwerp (Belgium)
only very sophisticated laboratory
come an adapted method which • Intertek - Le Havre (France)
instruments are able to detect such
could be adopted if a higher FAME • Intertek - Sydney (Australia)
levels.
limit is introduced. • Intertek - Singapore (Singapore)
A specially configured gas chro - • SGS - Rotterdam (Netherlands)
matograph (GC-MS method) is Globally, there are four means of • SGS - Le Havre (France)
currently used as one of the indus - testing under development (GC- • SGS - Lavera (France)
try accepted methods for detection. MS, SPE-FTIR, SPE-NMR and • Petrolab - Speyer (Germany)
The development of this test HPLC) to meet the objective to have
method was coordinated by the rapid and portable means of testing.
i n f o r m a t i o n
Test methods under spectroscopy method - precision
development down to 20 mg/kg (20ppm)
• GC-MS method IP PM-DY/09: • HPLC-ELSD method IP PM-DV/09:
selective ion monitoring/scan HPLC Evaporative light scattering
detection method - precision at detector method
5 mg/kg (5ppm) • SPE-GC method IP PM-EC/09:
• Flow analysis-FTIR rapid screening Solid phase extraction and gas
method IP PM-DT/09: Flow analysis chromatography method CONTACT DETAILS
by Fourier Transform Infra-Red
Marie FROMENT
Fuel Systems Engineer
Airbus Customer Services
Engineering
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 61 98
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 36 14
marie.froment@airbus.com
Conclusion
Due to the increase in the potential testing to determine the levels of FAME
of FAME contamination occurring in jet contamination and operational
fuel, above the currently allowable limit recommendations in the event of uplift
of 5ppm, Airbus is actively supporting of jet fuel contaminated with FAME.
the industry work on several aspects Updates and findings of the research
to minimize the potential impact of higher are documented (Airbus SIL 28-091)
levels of FAME contamination. and it is expected that additional
Areas of research include the increase recommendations will be available
of the clearance levels up to 100ppm, by the beginning of 2011.
the development of a quick means of field
13
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 14
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
Repair Design
Approval
Structure damage assessment
using Repair Manager
Damage to aircraft structure causes severe Airbus, Repair Manager (Part 2). This software
operational interruptions and the restoration to an provides airlines a simple and efficient method to
airworthy condition needs to be shown before the view, locate concessions and in-service damage
next flight. It can also be difficult to assess dama - and repairs, on a 3D (three-dimensional) sim pli -
ge, find and collect relevant information from a fied model of the aircraft, enabling them to record
wide variety of data sources, while complying and safely store the details. Repair Mana ger
with the regulatory record keeping requirements. allows the operator to build a comprehensive
This article will explain the regulatory re- database of all of the structural damages on an
quirements to report such damages (Part 1) and aircraft and maintain it together with the as -
will guide you through an overview of a damage sociated approval documentation.
case using the new on-line service developed by
Alain BALEIX Colin SMART
Head of Repair Approval Structure Engineer /
Airbus Customer Services SRM development
Airbus Customer Services
14
64
TSAF
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
Part 1: The first responsible of the
air worthiness of an aircraft is its
Repair Design
ow ner. Airbus is involved as being
Approval the designer and manufacturer in
this chain of responsibility.
Airbus is a Type Certificate (TC)
BACKGROUND
holder to design large transport
air craft and relative activities with
Since the early 1990s, Airbus
a Design Organisation Approval
sup ports the approval of repairs’
(DOA).Airbus aircraft are certi fied
ac tions or damage allowance with
in compliance to the certi fication
a ‘Repair design Approval Sheet’
basis issued from the air worthiness
(RAS) form (See Structure Repair
codes for large aircraft (JAR 25 /
Manual chapter 51-11-14).
FAR 25).
From 1996, Airbus has been
granted by the French DGAC
(Direction Générale de l’Aviation
Civile) with the privilege to ap prove
minor repair designs within its
Design Organisation Approval
(DOA). This privilege was ex tended
to the major repair design in 2003.
In 2004, the DOA was transferred
from the DGAC to the EASA
(European Aviation Safety
Agency), so the approvals are now
issued under an EASA DOA. This
article will only describe the Repair
Design Appro val process within the
EASA regulatory fra mework.
The equivalence of the regulatory
frame can be found in each country
having signed the Convention on
International Civil Aviation (also
known as the Chicago Convention).
THE AIRWORTHINESS
OF AN AIRCRAFT
The airworthiness aims to obtain
an acceptable level of safety for ci -
vil flights. An airworthy aircraft is:
• Designed and built according to
applicable requirements,
• Operated within its intended
environment and within its
quantified and declared
limitations,
• Maintained in accordance with
procedures acceptable to the
responsible authority.
15
M 541 66 741
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 15
Design and production Maintenance
25
21
Aircraft manufacturer Aircraft operator
CS 25: Technical requirements for aircraft design
Part 21: Designing and producing aircraft
Part M: Managing the continuing airworthiness of aircraft
Part 145: Maintaining aircraft
Part 66: Licensing maintenance personnel certifying staff
Part 147: Training maintenance personnel OPS
JAR FCL: Licensing flight crews
EV OPS: Operating aircraft
FCL
Licensing and operations
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
64
TSAF
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONTINUED
AIRWORTHINESS (ICA)
ICA result from the certification
exercise, issued and linked to the
Type Certificate (TC) and its
mo difications.All are compulsory
ac cording to the airworthiness
codes; ones largely depend on the
aircraft usage and may be
customized when the Airworth -
iness Limitation Section (ALS)
has to be strictly observed.
The structural issue illustrates the
process (see figure 1).
THE CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS
Ages of service may reveal
un expected defects not contem -
plated at the issuance of the TC,
either by the airworthiness code or
the desi gner. The regula tion
prevents the decrease of the level
of safety by ruling reports of
unsafe condi tions:
• The operator of the aircraft
according to EU-OPS 1.420,
• The responsible of the
maintenance according to Part
M.A.202,
• The maintenance station
according to Part 145.A.60,
• The design or production
organisation according to Part
21A.3.
Additional duties of Airbus, as a
TC holder, are:
• To investigate and to analyze
failures, malfunctions and
defects linked to its products.
• When an Airworthiness
Directive (AD) is issued against
the unsafe condition:
Airworthiness Directive - To propose the appropriate
corrective action,
- To make them available to all
known operators’
accomplishment instructions.
ICA and ADs contribute to main tain
a high level of safety as per fi gure 2.
Age of the aircraft
16
ytefas
fo
leveL
Initial
release
Maintenance
52SC
rep
sa
level
ytefaS
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 16
Structural issue
Figure 1
With an optimized design of light structure,
modern aircraft are susceptible
to fatigue damage. Their structural strength
is slowly entailed by potential cracks
under cyclic loadings of the aircraft.
It shall be maintained at an acceptable level
through a monitoring.
Regulations take into account this phenomena
and rule it through CS25 and Part 21
Compliance to CS25.571 by test and analysis
determines these areas and their damage
tolerance capability. The resulting monitoring
is published as a maintenance task
in accordance to CS25.1529 and CS25 appendix H,
so in the Airworthiness Limitation Section (ALS)
for the more critical areas
Instructions for Continued Airworthiness (ICA)
(Part 21.A61 or Part 21.A107 including ALS,
attached to type design Part 21.A31)
The maintenance programme is established
and approved according to Part M.A.302, including ICA.
The maintenance programme
is performed to comply
with Part M.A.201 a) 4).
Safety level
Figure 2
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 17
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
RESTORING THE CONTINUED Some repair data do not need this
n o t e s
AIRWORTHINESS WITH THE REPAIR specific approval such as:
DESIGN • A replacement without a design
activity, The operator needs to meet the
A damaged aircraft shall be asses sed • Explicitly approved data, such as airworthiness requirements for
also from an airworth iness the Structure Repair Manual ageing aircraft (FAA Part 26):
standpoint before the return to (SRM), Service Bulletins or •To demonstrate damage
service and to show evidence of an Production Concessions as part tolerance of repairs to Fatigue
acceptable level of safety. of the Aircraft Individual Critical Structure (FCS),
Certificate (AIC). •To include inspections
This assessment requires the associated with these repairs
or ganisations to inspect the A Repair design Approval Sheet in the Maintenance Programme,
damaged aircraft, design and (RAS) is dedicated to structural
approve the repair, embody the da mage, mainly ATA structure These requirements are being
repair and ins pect the repair chap ters (52 to 57) and interface implemented by EASA through the
according to the re pair approval. with systems like flight controls Part M (see Acceptable Means of
of ATA 27. The Airbus process Compliance AMC20-20).
Basically, the tasks of an organi sation for system damages is called a
designing a repair are simu lar to a Technical Adaptation (TA).
modification to a TC, such as to
draw/design the repair, show A RAS cannot be used for a
compliance to the require ments mo dification to TC. Airbus does
and obtain, or to approve, the not update its documentation
re pair design. (Illustrated Part Catalog - IPC,
Air craft Maintenance Manual -
SOME HIGHLIGHTS ON THE PART 21 AMM, Structure Repair Manual -
SRM, etc.) for a repair.
The scope of the Part 21 subpart M
(21A.431) is the approval of the The classification of the repair
repair. This means the elimination de sign (Part 21A.435) into minor
of damage and/or restoration to an or major follow the same criteria
airworthy condition of in-service than for a modification to TC (Part
aircraft. In Airbus DOA, a RAS is 21A.91), having the same means
the issuance of the Repair Design which are to report (see figure 3)
Approval as per Part 21A.437, its the relevant information to the
design certificate. au thorities.
Questions for reporting
Figure 3
Does the repair design permanently affect:
• The maintenance programme to ensure
the continued airworthiness of the aircraft?
• The airworthiness approved limitations in the
Aircraft Flight Manual (AFM), Master Minimum
Equipment List (MMEL), Weight & Balance Manual
(WBM)?
IF YES: MAJOR IF NO: MINOR
Does the repair design:
• Need extensive justification, testing or development
of new methods, techniques or practices?
• Require a re-evaluation of the original certification
substantiation data?
• Affect functions where the failure effect
is classified catastrophic?
17
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 18
LIMITATIONS AND INSTRUCTIONS LIMITATIONS
FOR CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS
FROM REPAIRS’ DESIGN When the limitations affect a life
limited part, the RAS indicates the
As for a Type Certificate (TC), life of the damaged area and not
structural repairs on light optimi - the life of the entire part, itself
zed structures (a fortiori allowable being dictated by the Airworthiness
damages) are susceptible to fatigue Limitation Section (ALS) Part 1:
and as for the TC, they require • When the RAS limit is lower
inspection leading to ICA and than the ALS limit, the new part
limitations. life is that of the RAS.
• When the RAS limit is higher
The Airbus Repair design Approval than the ALS limit, this is still
Sheet (RAS) form supports com - applicable and the Continuing
pliance in areas dedicated to Airworthiness Maintenance
maintenance requirements to Parts: Organisation (CAMO) needs to
• 21A.449 (unrepaired damage), observe the ALS limitation.
• 21A.443 (limitations), • TheALS limitation can vary
• 21A.449 (ICA). through time and the CAMO is
required to update the life
Areas dedicated to repair
limited parts’ maintenance
maintenance requirements
accordingly, including the
repaired ones.
REPAIR CATEGORY: SPECIFIC MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS: Some limitations can result when
the structural (damage or its repair)
Threshold*: affects the performances of the
No additional requirements
A
to zonal inspection programme air craft, like the aerodynamics.
Interval:
They may decrease the maximum
B Inspection required Method of inspection: weight of the aircraft, the One
If temporary, Engine Inoperative (OEI) ceiling
repair life limitation*:
C Temporary repair or other performance penalties.
Repair Structural
Modification Point (SMP)*: These limi ta tions have to be
recorded and communicated to the
* If not otherwise specified; Threshold, repair life limitation or SMP are from time of embodiment
flight opera tions of the company.
All these limitations comply with
ALI (Airworthiness Limitation Item) limitations to apply (life limited parts only)
the applicable requirements.
AOC - Operator EU-OPS 1
EU - OPS 1
Ensure reporting
Cockpit
Part M.A.302: Records Reports
(Tech Log)
• Instructions from competent
authority, Part M (CAMO)
• ICA issued by TC holders
Ensure continuous
or any other relevant approval, airworthiness of aircraft
• ICA issued by major repair Engineering
approval holder. Records Orders
Part 145 (AMO)
Release to service
maintenance work
Hangar and shops
18
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 19
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
INSTRUCTIONS FOR CONTINUED KEY FUNCTIONS
AIRWORTHINESS
Repair Manager mainly serves the
The compliance to CS25.571 for following areas of activity within
the repair results in an ICA like an airline:
for TC. Then, the task is compared • Line and heavy maintenance for
with the actual maintenance damage reporting, assessment
pro gramme of the aircraft, as and follow up,
esta blished by Airbus. • Engineering services for
• When a ‘zonal’ task is adequate, assessment and data analysis,
no inspection is indicated in the • Ease aircraft dispatch by direct
RAS, access and compilation of the
• When another maintenance task aircraft status reports (also
is adequate, it is repeated as a known as a Dent and Buckle
‘method’ in the RAS without Chart).
threshold and interval, At any time, a user can directly
• When a maintenance task is to access to:
be adapted locally for the repair • The structural status of the entire
inspection, the maintenance task fleet or a specific MSN
and its adaptation are indicated (Manufacturer Serial Number),
in the RAS, • The structural damage and repair
• When there is no maintenance history of any MSN by accessing
task, the RAS supports all all its repair files including
details for the inspection and it approval documentation,
is classified as major. • The aircraft status report of each
MSN.
All the ICA for major repairs shall
be incorporated by the CAMO into When damage is found, a user is
the maintenance programme of the able to report it through a series of
aircraft, according to the Part M process based steps to compile a full
302 requirement. and comprehensive damage re port,
with just a laptop connected to
Part 2: AirbusWorld, the Airbus custo mer
portal.
Repair Manager
This guidance provides the requi -
red information for the damage
OBJECTIVE AND OPERATIONAL evaluation and reporting back
BENEFITS the necessary data to the airline
Main tenance Control Centre
Repair Manager on-line software (MCC), Airbus, or a non-Airbus
provides airlines with a simple OEM (Original Equipment
method to view and locate non- Manufactu rer). Repair Manager
conformities and in-service dama ge also allows the operator to delegate
and repairs on a 3D simplified access to the tool for third party
model of the aircraft, to record and maintenance organisations, so they
safely store the details. Its objective can use the tool for the operator’s
is to ease line main tenance’s fleet during maintenance checks.
structural damage re porting, to
reduce elap sed time to assess STRUCTURAL DAMAGE REPORT
damage and authorize the aircraft’s CREATION
ering return to service. In addition, the
tool allows the operator to build a This guides the user through the
com pre hensive database of all the different steps of the compilation
struc tural damages on an aircraft of a report: Location, description
and maintain it together with the and assessment. It also helps the
as socia ted approval documenta tion. user to fill in repair and approval
data in the relevant tab of the
Structure Damage Report (SDR).
19
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 20
SPECIFIC TOOL FOR ACCURATE 3D simplified models together with
DAMAGE LOCATION - 3D SIMPLIFIED a list of all the recorded damage
MODELS classified by ATA chapter and
re pair category (Category A for ‘no
The 3D simplified models are used additional maintenance’, B for
to locate the damage/repair on a ‘specific maintenance require ment’
3D digital mock-up of the aircraft and C for ‘temporary repair’).
structure. Using the 3D models, a
user can directly locate a structural LINK TO AIRBUS TECHNICAL
damage on the aircraft. The 3D DOCUMENTATION
simplified models use a defined
set of damage shapes and colours The part damage and location
de pending on the damage status de tail pages give direct access to
(draft, opened, closed, deferred and AirN@v/Repair, AirN@v/Mainte -
obsolete). A summary of the dama ge nance and engi nee ring dra wings,
details, (including the damage type, through AirbusWorld. These
approval documents, inspec tion provi de direct access to the
information, etc.) are display ed on approved documentation data for
screen when the mouse is moved structural maintenance, such as
over the damage point. the Structure Repair Manual (SRM),
Non-des tructive Testing Manual
Damage on fuselage skin
SEARCH FUNCTION (NTM), Aircraft Maintenance
Manual (AMM), Illustrated Parts
Two types of search functions are Catalog (IPC) and the mechanical
available: drawings for convenient and
• A 3D search allowing the user to practical gui dance.
display all of the damages and
repairs on a particular WORKFLOW STEPS
Manufacturer Serial Number
(MSN) that meet the criteria The workflow, when damage is dis -
entered in the search fields, covered, is as follows (the Repair
• A tabular search allowing the Manager home page gives direct
user to list all the damages and access to the functions avai lable):
repairs for MSNs that meet the • Report:For creating and
criteria entered in the search continuing damage reports,
fields. This feature also provides • Find, access, consult, get
a work list of items awaiting reports:For accessing the
validation by the engineering or search functions and to export
maintenance control departments. the results, for users with an
‘administrator’ profile, it also
Using search criteria, users can get allows the export of selected
quick access to all the information Structure Damage Reports (SDR).
stored for a given, or multiple • Get an aircraft status report:
MSNs (open and deferred actions, For providing access view and
additional maintenance require- creating an aircraft status report
ments, etc.), or damage (status, di - using the 3D models and the
mensions, allowable damage, re - tabular listings.
pair and approval documents, etc.) • Advanced functions:Allowing
and can then launch the relevant the mass import of data.
actions, if required.
The import and export functions
AIRCRAFT STATUS REPORT allow the users to re-assign SDRs
(DENT AND BUCKLE CHART) for removable parts from one MSN
to another, in a semi-automated
An Aircraft Status Report (ASR) process.
can be generated automatically
showing the location of all of the
damages and repairs loaded on the
20
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 21
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
Repair Manager
overview of the
process for a repair
requiring a Repair
Design Approval
1
Step 1- Aircraft
The user selects the aircraft type and selects the relevant
aircraft from the list. The list contains all the aircraft of this type
operated by the airline. MROs will see the aircraft list for the
airline when access delegation has been given by the operator.
The user checks if the aircraft Weight Variant (WV) information
is up to date and updates the flight cycles and flight hours’
information.
The system will automatically list all the damage reports
created within the last 15 days to reduce the possibility of the
user entering a duplicate damage report. The location and
details of these reports can be accessed directly from the list.
2
Step 2- SDR Identification
A damage report title is entered to easily identify the damage
report in the future, (the only mandatory field on this page). The
operator has the ability to enter their own damage report
reference in addition to the unique damage report reference
created by the system. The damage event fields are used to link
several damage reports together following a major event and
make them easier to find.
Step 3- Part identification
The user sees the whole aircraft 3D model on screen and then
selects the aircraft section that has been damaged.
3
21
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
4
Step 4- Damage description
The next step is to locate the position of the damage on the 3D
model and to identify the damage type and main details. The
surrounding structure is easily identified by clicking on the
items on the 3D simplified model. The general location of the
damage is entered relative to the surrounding structure
selected. A direct access is then available to AirN@v/Repair,
AirN@v/Maintenance and Engineering drawings (AirbusWorld
services), to perform the detailed assessment of the damage.
A detailed damage report or Pre-Defined Reporting Sheet (PDRS)
is then attached describing the details of the damage and the
assessment performed.
Photographs of the damage including dimensions can also be loaded.
5
Step 5- Assessment
The assessment is performed according to the instructions
provided in the aircraft manuals, SRM, AMM, CMM, etc. If the
damage is within the limits of the approved documentation or
the repair solution is covered by the SRM, then the line
mechanics can validate the damage description and finalize the
approved process. If the damage is outside the approved
document limits, then the next steps need to be performed by
the engineering or maintenance control departments. They can
then decide whether a damage report needs to be sent to Airbus
and/or the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) for approval,
or whether they can approve the damage or repair themselves.
SRM: Structure Repair Manual
AMM: Aircraft Maintenance Manual
CMM: Component Maintenance Manual
6
Step 6- Requirements
If the damage is outside the SRM limits, the user then fills out
the details of their request for assistance, describing the current
status of the aircraft and the date the answer is required.
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 22
22
Step 7 - Repair
Once the technical statement is available (from Airbus, non-
Airbus OEM or from the SRM), the user completes the repair
page to record/load the repair proposal into the tool, the date
that the repair has been performed may also be completed,
if different from the date the damage was discovered. More than
one repair can be added so that the repair history is retained
(temporary repair followed by a permanent repair).
Step 8- Approval
Once the technical statement is available (from Airbus, non-
Airbus OEM or from the SRM), the user (the same or a different
one with the necessary rights) fills the approval page. The
approval page includes all the required information depending
on the damage category. It also allows specifying the type of
repair (Temporary or Permanent) and the existence of additional
maintenance requirements and inspections.
In this section, you can attach the Repair design Approval Sheet
(RAS) or other approval documents associated with the repair.
These can also include documents such as a ‘Permit to Fly’,
‘Alternative Means Of Compliance’ (AMOC), etc., as described in
the Repair Design Approval (Part 1). Any approval documents
can be attached to a damage report whether they are internal to
the operator or from a non-Airbus OEM.
As with the repairs page, multiple approvals can be attached on
separate tabs keeping the history of the repair approvals
available.
23
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 23
REPAIR DESIGN APPROVAL -STRUCTURE DAMAGE ASSESSMENT USING REPAIR MANAGER
7
8
CONTACT DETAILS
Alain BALEIX Colin SMART
Head of Repair Approval Structure Engineer /
Airbus Customer Services SRM development
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 04 15 Airbus Customer Services
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 28 73 Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 09 41
alain.baleix@airbus.com Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 21 81
colin.smart@airbus.com
Conclusion
An accurate damage assessment In that context, Repair Manager is a
and its relevant reporting are fundamental decision tool for speeding up and easing
for expediting the repair design. structural damage report compilations
A complete and precise report is the first during the assessment phase. Its
requirement for an efficient repair design. easy-to-use interface with simplified 3D
The observance of the Instructions for models will guide you, step by step,
Continued Airworthiness (ICA) is key for towards a more accurate and effective
safety. This encompasses the ICA issued, reporting and to be in compliance with
not only by an Airworthiness Directive, airworthiness authorities’ regulations
a Type Certificate or a modification, but for damage record keeping.
also from a Repair design Approval Sheet Repair Manager is available for all the
which you may find in AirbusWorld. Airbus aircraft families from mid July 2010.
23
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 24
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Head-Up
Display system
Enhanced operations’ situational
awareness
Innovation is at the heart of activities and Airbus (Multi-Programme Project) HUD, has been
ensures that its aircraft benefit from the most developed and proposed on the A320, A330/
ad vanced technology available. A340 aircraft families, as well as on the A380.
During the end of 2002, Airbus decided to provide This MPP HUD, based on proven technologies
the HUD (Head-Up Display) as an option on its already available on all aircraft within the Airbus
commercial aircraft (and as the basic instrument Fly-By-Wire family, is being further optimized
to operate the Airbus A400M military transport for the A350 XWB and will be proposed as an
aircraft). A new generation HUD, called MPP option at its Entry-Into-Service.
Eric ALBERT
HUD Project Leader
Airbus Cockpit Engineering
24
scinoivA
selahT
fo
ysetruoC
The Head-Up
Display (HUD)
system
The fundamental element of the
HUD system is a conformal head-
up display that presents essential
flight information and guidance to
the pilot in his forward field of
view for all flight phases.
The HUD is a see-through device
which helps the pilots to fly more
accurately, displaying collimated
flying symbols overlaying the real
outside world view.
The new generation HUD systems
are from a single source SFE
(Supplier Furnishing Equipment).
The HUDC receives data from the
System overview aircraft’s sensors and generates the
display symbology. The HPU
includes a LCD (Liquid Crystal
COCKPIT INTEGRATION Display) imager that projects the
image onto the HCU. The HCU is
The HUD System is fully inte grated an optical element (a glass plate),
into the existing cockpits. Either mounted between the pilot’s head
single or dual installation confi- and the windshield which reflects
gurations for the MPP HUD (on the projected image towards the
A320, A330/A340 aircraft families pilot. Whilst the superimposed
and the A380) are available as a image (to infinity) provides flight
forward fit. Only the dual information to the pilot, he can
installation configuration is cur - continue to see external scenes in a
rent ly proposed for the A350XWB. completely normal way (through
The HUD system com prises a: the HCU’s glass plate). The PMM
• Head-Up Display Computer allows the memorization of the
(HUDC): For data collection, electronic bore-sighting para meters.
display management, graphics This electronic process consists in
generation and BITE (Built-In aligning the optical references of
Test Equipment) management on the HUD cockpit equipment with
A320, A330/A340 aircraft families those of the aircraft.
and A380 , or a Display Unit
(DU) on A350XWB (basically
installed),
• Head-up Projection Unit (HPU):
Display device, drive electronics
and projection optics,
• Head-up Combiner Unit (HCU):
Optical element (glass plate),
mounted behind the windshield
which reflects the projected
image towards the pilot,
• Personalization Memory Module
(PMM): For memorization of the
electronic bore-sighting
parameters.
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 25
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
i n f o r m a t i o n
The certificationsof the new
MPP HUD system were achieved
on the following dates:
• A318 (PW): 23rdNov 2007,
• A320 & A318 (CFM):
17thDec 2007,
• A319 (CFM): 18thMarch 2008,
• A380 dual HUD (EA): 31stJuly 2009.
The certifications on A319
and A320 aircraft with IAE engines
are forecasted by the end of 2010.
The certification on other aircraft
models (e.g. A330/A340 Family
and A321) will depend on the
customers’ requests.
HPU
PMM
HCU
HUDC
MPP HUD components in the cockpit (A320, A330/A340 aircraft families
and A380)
25
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 26
MPP HUD (MULTI-PROGRAMME The HUD part numbers for the
PROJECT HEAD-UP DISPLAY) A350XWB are specific to this
aircraft because the HUDC is no
The single installation con figu - longer needed, as the software is
ration is composed of one HUD set hosted in the Head Down Display
(HUDC+HPU+HCU+PMM) as part of the Display Global Work
installed on the Captain’s side. For Package (see A350XWB HUD
the dual installation, one HUD set overall system architecture), there -
installed on the First Officer’s side fore saving space and weight.
n o t e s
completes the single installation.
In accordance with the MPP HUD The MPP HUD system was the
The Display Global Work Package
development policy, one of the first fully digital HUD certified on
is a system platform integrating
most ambitious challenges was that a civil aircraft. Indeed, it is the first
and regrouping the functions of
one same HUD be installed in the HUD based on the LCD (Liquid
the Cockpit Display System (CDS),
A320, A330/A340 aircraft families Crystal Display) technology and
the Head-Up Display and the
and A380 aircraft cockpits, despite not on the commonly used CRT
Airport Navigation.
their different architectures. This (Cathode Ray Tube) technology.
target has been achieved since the For the HUD, the LCD technology
HUD part numbers remain the provides an increased reliability
same, whatever the Airbus aircraft. and a great image luminosity. It
This offers the benefit of having also provides advantages in volu -
the Airbus cockpit commonality me, weight and consumption sa -
and brings cost savings to the vings that greatly reduces the ope -
operators in terms of maintenance rational costs when the aircraft is
and spares. equipped with such a system. The
LCD technology offers additional
A350XWB HUD graphic capabilities without time
disruptions (reverse video, haloing
The dual installation configuration effect, priorities, line thickness,
(upon the A350XWB basic con fi - grey level, etc.) and a good quality
gura tion) is composed of two HUD and legibility of the symbols.
cockpit equipment sets (HPU,
HCU and PMM).
New A350 XWB HUD components
integrated in the cockpit
HUD Projection and HUD Computer in the avionics bay
Combiner Units in the cockpit
26
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
MPP HUD - Overall system
architecture
PMM-CAPT PMM-F/O
115V 115V
HPU-CAPT HCU-CAPT HCU-F/O HPU-F/O
aircraft aircraft
CAPT-HUD F/O-HUD
controle (411VU) controle (412VU)
HUDC-1 HUDC-2
AFDX AFDX
Single
Aircraft avionics systems Dual Aircraft avionics systems
installation
installation
The main benefits introduced by The following items are unique to
the new A350 HUD compared to HUD symbology:
the MPP product are: • Conformal display elements:
• Weight savings and volume Some HUD symbols are
linked to the integrated designed to overlay the real
architecture as part of the world as seen by the pilot
Display Global Work Package through the HUD Combiner,
(no additional HUDC), • Viewing position:
• More integrated solutions in the The HUD is designed
cockpit layout (linings, etc.), to be viewed from the cockpit
• Better reliability based on LED Eye Reference Point and a head
backlighting (instead of lamps) movement area around that
for the LCD display, point, called the “Eye Motion
• Better head clearance, Box”,
• Better optical performances (e.g. • Viewing into the sun:
with regards to the eyes’ motion The HUD is designed to be able
box defining the three to project symbology that can be
dimensional area in space in seen against a very bright
which the centre of the HUD background (34000 Cd/m2).
virtual display can be viewed The pilots can use the dedicated
with at least one eye). sun-visor to reduce the intensity
of the sun and can set the
HUD core function brightness of the symbology
so that it can be seen (or use
(symbology)
an automatic brightness feature).
The primary aim of the HUD sym -
bology is to provide essential flight
data and information needed for
the safe and effective control of the
aircraft. It is necessary for the
symbology to accurately represent
the outside (conformal) view,
while not obstructing this outside
view.
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 27
n o t e s
The HUD is not a substitute but an
additional instrument to the
existing avionics and needs to be
integrated.
The HUD integration in the cockpit
is one of the key factors to
achieve the operational objectives
with a high consistency and
efficient use.
HUD in-flight symbology The FPV (Flight Path Vector)
27
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 28
The core symbols of the HUD is
HUD core symbols: Piloting
the attitude/energy box, mainly
with the FPV and Total FPA
composed of the:
• Aircraft attitude (pitch, roll,
side-slip and heading),
To level off,
• The FPV (Flight Path Vector)
forward stick input
also commonly named ‘bird’,
• The Total FPA (Flight Path
Acceleration Acceleration Angle), FPV
Total FPA Total FPA
• The speed delta (on the left side
FPA
Runw
of the FPV).
aimi
poin
The Flight Path Vector (FPV)
indicates the actual aircraft’s tra -
jectory through the aircraft Flight
Aircraft is climbing Aircraft is at flying level
’chevrons’ above FPV, but still accelerating Path Angle (FPA) as the longi -
aircraft accelerates To stop tudinal component and the aircraft
accelerating, drift angle as the lateral compo -
reduce thrust
nent.
The Total FPA (or total energy
‘chevrons’) indicates the actual
total energy of the aircraft (poten -
tial and kinetic). On top, it provi -
Aircraft is at flying level and at constant speed
des the acceleration/decelera tion
status of the aircraft.
The velocity vector FPV asso -
ciated to the total energy (Total
Aircraft is right of track Aircraft is on of track Aircraft is left of track
FPA) assist the pilot to control the
speed and path stability during the
approach.
One of the other fundamental
elements of the HUD is the confor -
mal approach symbology which
allows enhancement of the pilots’
situa tional awareness, by showing
conformal trajectory related sym bols
The pilot flies the FPV The pilot flies the FPV to The pilot flies the FPV
to the left to correct the runway centerline track to the right to correct superimposed to the external
scene.
The angle between the LOC
(Localizer) axis and the horizon
indicates the lateral deviation of
the aircraft’s position with the
runway centre line.
The position of the Approach
Figure A Figure B Figure C
Reference Flight Path symbol
Aircraft is below Aircraft is on Aircraft is above versus the touchdown point, indi-
approach path approach path approach path cates the aircraft’s vertical position
versus its ideal approach path.
The symbo logy set described on
the left, including the Primary
Flight Display-like symbology (al -
titude, speed scale, Flight Mode
Annunciator, etc.) is the primary
The pilot flies the FPV The pilot flies the FPV The pilot flies the FPV
display mode of the HUD.
beyond the touchdown to the touchdown before the touchdown
point to correct point point to correct
For all these figures, natural perspective rules apply.
28
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 29
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
Horizon line
Pitch
Published
Aircraft approach
current descent
FPA path angle
FPV
Runway
aiming
point
Approach reference flight path symbols LOC axis
Some special symbology sets have (Precision Approach Path
been developed and are optimized Indicator), enabling the pilot Interpretation of the Approach Reference Flight
Path symbols (corresponding to the figure A
so as the HUD adapts itself to the to precisely calibrate and follow
opposite page)
current flight phase and provides a desired approach path without
the associated display modes: external aids.
• Taxi (ground speed, acceleration • Enhanced stability of manually
cue, etc.), flown approaches (instrument
• Take-Off (lateral raw data and and visual approaches) and the
guidance, tail strike limit for accuracy of the landing
A380, etc.), touchdown, by providing the
• Climb, cruise, descent for velocity vector associated to the
mainly weather avoidance total energy in the HUD; this
‘windshear warning, TCAS RA facilitates the pilots’ control of
(Traffic Alert and Collision speed and path stability during
Avoidance System Resolution the approach.
Advisory) warning, etc., • An enhancement in flying
• Approach (mainly composed of seamlessly Instrument
the here-above described Meteorological Condition (IMC)
symbology), to Visual Meteorological
• Roll-Out (ground deceleration Condition (VMC), flying
scale, etc.). head-up.
• Enhanced pilot situational
Each display mode has various ‘de- awareness when close to the
cluttered’ level functions of the ground by showing conformal
flight phases, in order to favour trajectory related symbols
see-through capability of the HUD. superimposed to the external
scene (aircraft trajectory in poor
Operational visibility as seen on the previous
HUDs),
benefits
• Situational information for the
monitoring of automatic
approaches with Autoland
The HUD system improves the
(CAT II & CAT III approaches
crews’ situational awareness (the -
with ‘Autoland’ and roll-out).
re fore contributing to safety) in
• Reversionary means for roll-out
providing:
in the event of an untimely
• Situational information for the
‘Autopilot’ disconnection
manual visual approaches and
or a failure of a system affecting
landings. With the display of the
automatic roll-out, following an
approach reference path marks, the
automatic approach and landing,
HUD can replace airport aids such
• A wider field of view
as the VASIS (VisualApproach
(35° x 26°) in high crosswind
Slope Indicator System) or PAPI
conditions.
29
HEAD-UP DISPLAY SYSTEM - ENHANCED OPERATIONS’ SITUATIONAL AWARENESS
CONTACT DETAILS
Eric ALBERT
HUD Project Leader
Airbus Cockpit Engineering
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 16 01
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 63 82
eric.albert@airbus.com
Conclusion
The Head-Up Display (HUD) contributes display the video image as well as the
significantly to increasing the pilot symbols without any constraints
situational awareness, particularly during (particularly on graphic capability and
the approach and landing phases by flexibility which are not time constraining).
showing trajectory related symbols The HUD is designed to support future
superimposed on the pilot’s actual technologies such as the EVS (Enhanced
external view. The experience in service Video System), SVS (Synthetic Vision
confirmed that the HUD is a very good System) or SGS (Surface Guidance
means to stabilize the aircraft during the System) that will enhance surface
approach phase, assuming that the flight operations and obstacle awareness.
crews follow a dedicated HUD training. Thanks to HUD capabilities, these future
The HUD system also offers enhancement growing evolutions will reinforce the
with a video image support. Indeed, the enhancement of flight safety on all Airbus
fully digital processing allows the HUD to aircraft models.
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:04 Page 30
In addition to these improvements, In regards to the operational
the HUD system also brings some feedback (Entry-Into-Service in
operational credits, such as: 2009), the customers with aircraft
• The lateral guidance information equipped with HUD highlighted
for take-off roll, in low visibility the following:
(certified on the A320 Family, • Final approach trajectory
on-going development for the (through the control system with
A380). As with the Para-Visual the HUD approach symbols)
Indicator (PVI), the lower take- very clear and appreciated (exact
off minima can be reduced from flight path of the aircraft),
a 125m Runway Visual Range • Reference mark of the runway
(RVR) for EASA (500ft. for slope (conformal approach
FAA) to a 75 meters RVR for symbols) very helpful,
EASA (300ft. for FAA), thanks • Ground deceleration scale to
to this lateral guidance monitor ‘Autobrake’ action or
information. control manual braking during
• The HUD is eligible in roll-out done with ease,
approach, for reduction of CAT • During taxi, the indication of the
1 Approach minima, down to ground speed and the energy
Retrofit installation on an A340-600 CAT II Approach minima ‘chevrons’ (Total FPA), highly
flight test aircraft
(conducted with Auto-Pilot appreciated.
engaged) on Type 1 airport
installations as per FAA Order The HUD installation is retro fitab le.
8400.13B or EASA NPA OPS- The retrofit conditions have to be
41. This operational benefit defined and agreed by the invol ved
requires an operational aircraft programme.
approval from the operator’s
airworthiness authority.
Pitch/roll adjustment tool
for HUD installation
30
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:05 Page 31
SPICE - THE FUTURE GALLEYS
SPICE
The future galleys
Ever since the first generation of large passenger To study this question, Airbus spent nine intensive
aircraft were introduced in the late 1960s, galley months on-site, with three leading airlines. This
architectures have been constructed around the work generated a large body of knowledge con-
omnipresent trolley. It is hard to imagine the air - cerning the issues experienced with today’s
line world today without these trolleys, but an galleys, as well as the types of solutions that are
increasing number of Airbus customers have been required. To make use of the knowledge, Airbus
voicing the question of whether the time has initiated a project called SPICE (SPace Innovative
come, after 40 years, for the air transport industry Catering Equipment) which promises to make
to look into new architectures for galleys. significant progress in improving galley designs.
Daniel PERCY
Airbus Marketing Manager
Aircraft Interiors Marketing
31
SPICE - THE FUTURE GALLEYS
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:05 Page 32
Modernising galley With SPICE, these requirements
are satisfied by the doors on the
architecture
galley itself.
without disturbing
The third architectural change is to
today’s processes
create a system of modular sizes
between the different elements
The SPICE project found that the which go into the galley. The boxes
main hurdle to achieving true in - used in SPICE galleys come in
novation in galley architecture and three sizes which relate to each
therefore, to bringing signi ficant other in the same way, as paper
benefits, was the trolley itself. sizes such as A4-A3-A2, each
Thinking out of the box, or out of being twice the size of the previous
the trolley in this case, revealed one. In addition, the Galley Inserts
that the true building blocks of (GAIN) such as ovens and beve -
airline catering are the trays or rage makers, also use the same
1 Chilled upper drawers which are put into the modular sizes.
compartments trolleys.
Architectural
SPICE galleys are therefore based
2 Transfer around the dimensions of the trays efficiency
table
used in today’s most popular galley
standard, ATLAS. However, SPICE These architectural changes make
3 Storage makes three key changes to the it possible to bring about signi fi -
galley storage architecture. cant efficiency improve ments.
The first architectural change is to Using boxes and FSCs, stored
4 Flexible
store trays and drawers in light - behind ‘9g’ doors on the galley,
stowage
weight boxes, instead of trolleys. helps to reduce weight from the
The boxes are then moved around aircraft catering equipment. The
5 Service the cabin by Folding Service Carts boxes themselves no longer need
box (FSC), which stay on-board the wheels or brakes and the lack of
aircraft and remain in a suitable ‘9g’ structure means that any
condition for presen tation to custo - material can be used in the box
6 Half-size
mers. A typical widebody aircraft construction. Boxes made of metal,
meal box
will need 8 to 10 FSCs. plastic and even cardboard, have
been designed for use with the
7 Meal The second architectural change SPICE galley. A typical SPICE
box is to satisfy airworthiness require - Meal Box can weigh as little as 6kg
ments using the galley instead when made from plastic. This,
of the trolley. Today, trolleys are compared to today’s trolleys which
certificated to have traditionally weighed any -
1
withstand ‘9g’ thing in the range from 21 to 30kg,
loads and to be leads to significant fuel savings.
flameproof.
4
2
8
6 7
5
3
32
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:05 Page 33
SPICE - THE FUTURE GALLEYS
SPICE saves space as well as New galley
weight. When thinking about one
features
of today’s galleys, it is evident that
above the trolleys there is a lack of
geometrical optimisation caused The architectural changes which
by the various different shapes of bring efficiency improvements also
equipment. In contrast, the modu - allow to create a galley system
la rity of the boxes and equipment which has a range of new features
which go into the SPICE galley not available on today’s galleys.
design ensures that no space is Full Plug & Play exchangeability
wasted. of equipment is facilitated by the
modularity of GAINs and boxes.
Additionally, space is won in The galley and GAIN arran -
SPICE galleys through making gements will be pre-certified, al -
ergonomic improvements. With lowing significant flexibility in
today’s galleys, cabin crew have to configuring and reconfiguring the
perform all lifting and carrying galley arrangement, with an equip - 8 Folding Service Cart
tasks manually. Therefore, in order ment swap taking only five mi - (FSC)
to control the ergonomic impact on nutes.
the cabin crew, limitations are
required on the number and weight Chilled upper compartments are 9 Meal
service
of the boxes which can be stored in possible due to the ‘9g’ galley
the galley. SPICE introduces a doors being installed at both levels.
device called a Transfer Table, This gives much more flexibility in 10 Drinks
which saves the need for cabin galley packing, allowing the meal service
crew to lift or carry and therefore and drink items to be placed in the
allows more boxes to be stored in upper part of the galley without
11 Waste
the galley since they can be stacked the need for dedicated 3-mode-
collection
higher up. chillers, as used today.
To quantify these efficiency gains, Customisable service items can be 12 Plug & Play
Airbus has completed numerous as- created to be used directly in the equipment
sessments of SPICE galleys versus service. Because SPICE boxes
delivered airline galley con figura - don’t need to be certified and that
13 Preparation
tions, using airline galley loading the SPICE Service Box (similar to
galley
plans for routes which have the today’s Standard Unit) is tall
highest catering content loaded on- enough to stand bottles upright,
board. These assessments show that boxes can be designed ergono - 14 Sliding
the typical weight savings on an mically optimised for in-flight doors
A330/A340 Family aircraft is in the service which can even be pre-
range of 600kg. For aircraft as big prepared by the caterer. This
as the A380, these weight savings ensures that prepa -
can reach more than one ton. The ration times are
space savings usually allow to have reduced, allowing
one less galley monument, creating the passengers to
enough space to win two or benefit from a
three economy seats. quicker service.
12
9
10
13
11
14
33
SPICE - THE FUTURE GALLEYS
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:05 Page 34
Testing the The challenge
concept with of changing galley
airlines and standards
caterers
Changing a system which has been
in place for over 40 years naturally
Clearly, making all these changes
introduces, not only major bene -
to galleys creates a need to learn
fits, but also a major challenge due
how to use the new features, design
to the impact of dispatch ope rations.
ways to use the galley efficiently
Ultimately, it is a question of
and to validate the processes on
whether the benefits outweigh the
ground and in the cabin. For this
temporary additional cost, created
purpose, Airbus has built prototype
by operating dual standards over
SPICE equipment and has been
the changeover period.
working together with industry
partners.
The main changeover cost is caused
when an aircraft with one galley
In cooperation with airline cabin
type is swapped for an aircraft with
crew, who spent over one month in
another galley type, after the cate -
planning and executing cabin
ring has already been prepared.
trials, the usability of the new
This causes a dispatch delay as the
galley features, such as the Fold-
new aircraft is re-catered.
able Service Cart (FSC) and the
Transfer Table have been succes -
The other significant cost for
sfully tested and SPICE service
airlines may be slightly higher
routines developed.
prices from the caterers, since they
will need to purchase the SPICE
These tests revealed a fast learning
ground equipment. Additionally,
curve for cabin crew in adapting
the caterer will need to store
from today’s world to SPICE. The
equipment for both today’s galleys
crew confirmed that SPICE’s design
and for SPICE galleys which in -
improved ergonomics, and that the
creases the amount of floor space
use of pre-prepared service items
rented.
enables to reduce service times.
Fortunately, these extra costs are
Airbus has also been working with
more than offset by the benefits of
the top airline caterers to ensure
SPICE. Even in a conservative as -
that SPICE can be integrated into
sessment of a mixed fleet scena rio,
their existing facilities and pro-
where SPICE equipped aircraft are
cesses. The first step has been to
operating alongside non-SPICE
design the ground equipment the
equipped aircraft, it can be shown
caterer will use to transport SPICE
that on average each SPICE large
Meal Boxes . Testing of this device
passenger aircraft generates an ad -
has shown that SPICE Meal Boxes
ditional US $1.5 million NPV (Net
can be transported in the same way
Present Value) over its life.
as trolleys.
This significant finding means that
Tests in the caterers’ facilities
the transition to SPICE does not
identified that it was fully possible
require retrofits. However, if the
to integrate SPICE with minimal or
airline wished to retrofit existing
no adaptation, to existing equip -
fleets with SPICE, a business case
ment such as trolley conveyor
analysis has shown a payback pe -
systems, and washing streets.
riod as low as three years. This is a
Finally, testing of the galley loa -
significant improvement on busi -
ding with the caterers revealed that
ness cases for retrofitting today’s
SPICE galleys can be expected to
galleys.
be loaded in equivalent times to
today’s galleys.
34
35
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:05 Page 35
SPICE - THE FUTURE GALLEYS
The vision feedback on what is required to
move forward. As a result of this
for SPICE and
dialogue, Airbus will complete a
the programme number of additio nal trials and
development activi ties.
in 2010
To allow airlines to validate weight
Airbus’ vision for SPICE is that it and space savings and prove their
should become a new industry individual business cases, a full
standard, open to all, for use on air - A330 economy cabin demonstrator
craft produced by all the air fra - is currently under construction.
mers.
This facility will also be used to
To this end, Airbus is working with complete trials, benchmarked
industry organisations to ensure against today’s operation, for the
that the standard for SPICE equip- aircraft turn-around-time and for
ment and its interfaces is set at the in-flight service.
start.
In conjunction with known galley
Industrially speaking, the goal is to and equipment suppliers, the deve -
be able to deliver the first passen - lopment activity will continue.
ger aircraft with SPICE galleys This work will focus on maturity
installed in the second half of and reliability, and on es ta blishing
2013. However, this is contingent detailed technical per formance of
CONTACT DETAILS
upon the readiness of the market. the galley system.
Under consultation, participating Also, an A320 Family version of Daniel PERCY
airlines have provided extensive the SPICE concept will be created. Marketing Manager
Aircraft Interiors Marketing
AIRBUS Central Entity
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 76 33
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 32 73
daniel.percy@airbus.com
Conclusion
The architecture of galleys has not ‘Plug & Play’ modularity of galley inserts,
changed in over 40 years, since the chilled upper compartments and reduced
introduction of the first large passenger service times are additional interesting
aircraft. Several airlines which recognized features.
this asked Airbus to take the lead in
introducing innovation in this area. After Airbus has already completed testing of
considerable research, Airbus conceived SPICE prototype equipment. This includes
a new type of galley system, called SPICE testing of cabin service, where actual
(SPace Innovative Catering Equipment). airline cabin crew served seated
SPICE makes a number of architectural passengers. It has also been tested with
changes compared to today’s galleys, caterers, making sure they can cope with
including introducing a system of modular SPICE in their facilities and during aircraft
boxes which are moved by Folding loading. All tests have shown positive and
Service Carts. encouraging results. Following
consultation with the airlines about the
Key benefits of SPICE for airlines include conditions for launching SPICE and the
weight savings of 600kg and space final validation testing is underway.
savings, enabling 2 or 3 extra economy
seats to be installed. Several ergonomic The vision for SPICE is that it will become
advantages for cabin crew are also a new global galley standard, available for
introduced, including lifting assistance the whole industry.
using a device called a Transfer Table.
35
64
TSAF
FAST46_v7.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 21/07/10 18:05 Page 36
GALLEYS - IMPROVING OVER 40 YEARS’ OLD GALLEY DESIGN
Improving
over 40 years’
old galley
design
Photo
Lab
Courtesy
of
Airbus
Flight
Test
Flight attendant
in the galley
S.E.2010 Armagnac
Galleys on commercial Over the current Here, the flight
airlines typically 40 years of old attendant is
include facilities to trolley technology, meticulously
serve and store food there are two main preparing the meals
and beverages. sizes of trolley in for the passengers
Aircraft in operation use with the airlines (maybe with a touch
today mainly use the around the world, of spice) on a
familiar trolley called the ‘ATLAS’ S.E.2010 Armagnac, an
system. This system (most common)and ‘KSSU’ aircraft of the late
was introduced in the sizes. Airbus has 1940s. The Armagnac
late 1960s at the developed a new was a cantilever mid-
same time the new galley concept called wing monoplane
generation of large ‘SPICE’ (SPace designed for a
aircraft were Innovative Catering transatlantic
entering into service Equipment) - read service with a
with the airlines. article in this FAST retractable tricycle
The significantly magazine edition, landing gear.
larger number of which is a potential A number of versions
passengers on these new worldwide of this long range
aircraft meant that standard with aircraft were
meals could no longer significant advantages planned, from a
be efficiently for the cabin crew, 60 passenger ‘sleeping
delivered by hand, as the operators compartment’ version
they had been up and the caterers. to 84, 108 and 160
until that point. passengers.
36
64
TSAF
FAST46_COUVval_v7.qxp:couv FAST 46 22/07/10 10:23 Page 4
CUSTOMER SERVICES WORLDWIDE AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Bruce JONES
Senior Vice President
Services & Customer Support
Customer Services Bangalore
Tel:+33 (0)5 67 19 19 80
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 18 18
USA/CANADA
Tom ANDERSON
Senior Vice President
Customer Services
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3484
Fax:+1 (703) 834 3464
CHINA
Pierre STEFFEN
Services and Customer Support centres
Senior Vice President
Training centres
Customer Services & Internal Operations Material Logistics centres / Regional warehouses
Tel:+86 10 8048 6161 Ext 5020 Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
Fax:+86 10 8048 6162 RCSM location Country RCSM location Country
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT ADMINISTRATION Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates Lisbon Portugal
Alexandria Egypt London United Kingdom
Jean-Bernard GALY
Algiers Algeria Los Angeles United States of America
Head of Field Service Al-Manamah Bahrain Louisville United States of America
Tel:+33 (0)5 67 19 04 13 Almaty Kazakhstan Luton United Kingdom
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Amman Jordan Luxembourg Luxembourg
Amsterdam Netherlands Madrid Spain
TECHNICAL, MATERIAL LOGISTICS Astana Kazakhstan Manchester United Kingdom
& TRAINING SUPPORT Athens Greece Manilla Philippines
Airbus has its main Material Logistics centre in Atlanta United States of America Marrakech Morocco
Hamburg, and regional warehouses in Frankfurt, Auckland New Zealand Mauritius Mauritius
Washington D.C., Dubai, Beijing, Shanghai and Bangkok Thailand Melbourne Australia
Singapore. Barcelona Spain Memphis United States of America
Beijing China Mexico City Mexico
Airbus operates around the world, Beirut Lebanon Miami United States of America
24 hours a day, every day. Berlin Germany Milan Italy
Bogota Colombia Minneapolis United States of America
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Bucharest Romania Montreal Canada
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Budapest Hungary Moscow Russia
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Buenos Aires Argentina Mumbai India
airtac@airbus.com Cairo Egypt Muscat Oman
Calcutta India Nanchang P.R. China
Spares AOGs in North America should be Casablanca Morocco Nanjing China
addressed to: Charlotte United States of America Newcastle Australia
Tel:+1 (703) 729 9000 Chengdu China New York United States of America
Fax:+1 (703) 729 4373 Chicago United States of America Ningbo P.R. China
Cologne Germany Palma de Mallorca Spain
Spares AOGs outside North America Colombo Sri Lanka Paris France
should be addressed to: Damascus Syria Philadelphia United States of America
Tel:+49 (40) 50 76 4001 Delhi India Phoenix United States of America
Fax:+49 (40) 50 76 4011 Denver United States of America Prague Czech Republic
Dhaka Bangladesh Qingdao P.R. China
aog.spares@airbus.com
Doha Qatar Riyadh Saudi Arabia
Spares related HMV issues outside Dubai United Arab Emirates Roma Italy
North America should be addressed to: Dublin Ireland San Francisco United States of America
Tel:+49 (40) 50 76 4003 Dusseldorf Germany San Salvador El Salvador
Fort Lauderdale United States of America Santiago Chile
Fax:+49 (40) 50 76 4013
Frankfurt Germany Sao Paulo Brazil
hmv.spares@airbus.com Guangzhou China Seoul South Korea
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Haikou China Shanghai China
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Hamburg Germany Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Hangzhou China Shenyang China
Hanoi Vietnam Shenzhen China
Airbus Maintenance Training Centre Hefei P.R. China Singapore Singapore
Hamburg, Germany Helsinki Finland Sofia Bulgaria
Tel: +49 (40) 74 38 8288 Hong Kong S.A.R. China Sydney Australia
Fax:+49 (40) 74 38 8588 Honolulu United States of America Taipei Taiwan
Indianapolis United States of America Tashkent Uzbekistan
Airbus Training subsidiaries Istanbul Turkey Tehran Iran
Miami, Florida - U.S.A. Jakarta Indonesia Tel Aviv Israel
Tel:+1 (305) 871 36 55 Jeddah Saudi Arabia Tokyo Japan
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Jinan P.R. China Toluca Mexico
Johannesburg South Africa Tripoli Libya
Beijing, China Karachi Pakistan Tunis Tunisia
Tel:+86 10 80 48 63 40 Kita-Kyushu Japan Vienna Austria
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Washington United States of America
Kuwait City Kuwait Wuhan China
Bangalore, India (Maintenance training) Lagos Nigeria Xi'an China
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Lanzhou China Zurich Switzerland
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Lima Peru 37
FAST46_COUVval_v7.qxp:couv FAST 46 22/07/10 10:22 Page 1
