Airbus technical magazine
January 2014
#53
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
2255##TTSSAAFF
2200
35#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
Your Airbus technical magazine is now on tablet #53
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD
Design: Daren BIRCHALL
Cover: Electrical Structure Network Ground lightning
Photo by: Master Films / J-B ACCARIEZ
protection 04
Printer: Amadio
Authorisation for reprinting FAST magazine
articles should be requested from the editor
Handling Qualities
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73 Analysis 10
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
FAST magazine is available on internet A350 XWB
www.airbus.com/support/publications
Electrical Structure Network 20
and on tablets
ISSN 1293-5476
Towards a high European
air traffic demand 26
© AIRBUS 2014
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
Volcanic eruptions:
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted Ashes to AVOID 32
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive FAST
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public from the past 38
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
We’ve got it
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be contacted
to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains, covered 39
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350 XWB, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Where you see these icons,
Photo copyright Airbus videos or slide shows are available
iOS (iPad) & Android Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Flight on the FAST digital app.
Test Photo Lab, EADS Corporate Heritage, Master Films, EXM company, Eurocontrol,
SESAR J.U., Johann Helgason
Airbus recommends disconnecting the Ground Power Unit from the aircraft during Faraday cage/shield
storms to avoid damage to electrical components. In practice, during the Turn-
A Faraday cage (or shield) is an
Around-Time, the ground power supply needs to remain connected to continue
enclosure formed by conducting
supplying the aircraft with power. It is under these circumstances that the aircraft
material or by a mesh of such
is particularly vulnerable.
material.
An aircraft is designed as a Faraday cage (see side box), which is a structure that Such an enclosure blocks external
blocks external static and non-static electric fields, therefore avoiding damage by static and non-static electric fields
lightning strikes. However, when an aircraft is connected to a ground power supply, by channelling electricity through
the connecting cable provides a direct route to the aircraft’s systems. the mesh, providing constant
voltage on all sides of the enclosure.
By electromagnetic induction (see side box) a lightning strike can damage the Primary Since the difference in voltage is
Electrical Power Distribution Centre (PEPDC) and/or the Generator & Ground Power the measure of electrical potential,
Control Unit (GGPCU). This kind of damage would result in an Aircraft On Ground no current flows through the space.
(AOG), requiring costly repairs taking up to six days to complete.
A Faraday cage operates because
an external static electrical field
causes the electric charges within
the cage’s conducting material
to be distributed such that they
cancel the field’s effect in the cage’s
interior. This phenomenon is used,
for example, to protect electronic
equipment from lightning strikes
and electrostatic discharges.
Electromagnetic induction
Induced voltage is an electric
potential created by an electric field,
magnetic field or a current.
This is conducted to the ground
Working ‘like lightning’ to develop a solution
by an ionized section of the
atmosphere, and can easily induce
Operators requested that Airbus quickly find a solution to protect ground power
voltages in conductive material
connected to the A380 in these particular conditions. In December 2012 during
such as electrical cabling.
Airbus’ A380 symposium at Dubai (United Arab Emirates), the A380 Chief Engineer
(Marc GUINOT) committed to resolving the issue before the end of June 2013.
35#TSAF
40
35#TSAF
50
Ground lightning protection
Ground
lightning
protection
An adapter for
Ground Power Units
Lightning
strike
Ground
Power Unit
A380 operators reported incidents of lightning strikes (GPU)
while parked on the apron at Singapore’s Changi
international airport. These strikes were principally
attracted due to a combination of the airport’s surface,
the local climate and the height of the aircraft. In just
seven months, Airbus’ Operational Reliability Task Force
developed a dedicated Lighting Protection Unit (LPU),
which is now undergoing in-service evaluation with our
customers.
November Design office put in the loop
December Airbus Chief Engineer commits to airlines
The context
Plug interface found
The equatorial climate is often characterized by heavy heat Lightning protection requirements
and regular precipitations throughout the year. This leads to January LPU development launched with Leach International Design Design
Office Office
strong, electrically charged, thunder storms particularly in the First specific draft
development project
monsoon season. February LPU design frozen management
The height of the A380’s vertical stabilizer coupled with the Plug integration tests on aircraft
structure of the apron’s surface increases the possibility that
March Plug design frozen
the aircraft may be struck, directly or indirectly, during the
April
Turn-Around-Time (TAT).
May
Article by
June Parts delivery to airlines
Frédéric FORGET
A380 Work Package Leader July In-service evaluation
AIRBUS
frederic.f.forget@airbus.com
2102
/
3102
Fig. 1
Integration and tests
35#TSAF
60
35#TSAF
70
Frédéric FORGET, from Airbus’ Electrical and Optical Standard parts’ department took
the lead and was tasked with quickly finding a solution - a big challenge knowing that
this type of project usually takes 18 to 24 months.
The DO160 is an official document which defines a series of minimum The DO160 provides the test methods
He set up a dedicated task force with the lightning strikes’ and electrical network
standard environmental test conditions (categories) and applicable test and procedures to verify the capability
specialists. Due to the time constraints of validating changes to the aircraft itself,
procedures for airborne equipment. The purpose of these tests of equipment to withstand transient
the task force focused on providing external protection. The idea was to develop an
is to provide a laboratory means of determining the performance voltages which are intended to represent
external protection tool for Ground Support Equipment (GSE). The decision was then
characteristics of airborne equipment. These environmental conditions the induced effects of lightning.
taken to use the same technology already existing inside the aircraft to protect the power
are representative of those which may be encountered in airborne operation The most relevant waveform for our
feeder: the Lightning Protection Unit (LPU), but optimized for this specific application.
of the equipment. application is the voltage waveform 2.
An LPU embedded solution
Knowing that it would also have taken too much time to develop a specific interface,
the team decided to embed the LPU into an existing adaptor plug (Fig. 2) manufactured
by TDA Lefebure, that would connect between the aircraft and the Ground Power Unit.
In parallel, the lightning strike specialists defined the most realistic threat in order to
dimension the LPU protection. The lightning threat model used covered more than
90% of potential cases. The induced voltage generated by the lightning’s indirect
effect is 1,600 volts, or 14 times the aircraft’s normal network voltage.
The LPU uses transient voltage suppression diodes (Fig. 3) to filter the voltage spike
out through the ground during the lightning strike. The residual voltage after the LPU
shall not exceed the network voltage spike envelope defined in figure 5, keeping the
power entering the aircraft close to 115 volts.
The main functions of the LPU are to protect the electrical power line in case of
lightning strikes and not damage and/or perturb the power signal during, and after,
normal/abnormal transient voltage.
Ground service connections
and electrical service panels
Airbus approached Leach International, suppliers of the A380’s internal LPU, to
redesign and resize it to handle the threat. The plug manufacturers redesigned it
to interface with the LPU. An integration test on the aircraft was done with a plug,
in order to check the pin retention and if the plug and the structure did not clash.
In parallel, Airbus used Catia DMU (Digital Mock-Up) software to visualize its integration.
Due to the ground service connections’ typology, it was necessary to design two
assembly configurations of the LPU plug (Fig. 4). Each A380 aircraft needs a set of
four plugs, the configuration ‘A’ plug is only used for the external ‘power 3’ receptacle
and the configuration ‘B’ for the external power plugs ‘1, 2 and 4’ (Fig. 6 & 7).
For the in-service evaluation six sets of four plugs were produced.
)stlov(
egatloV
kaeP
Ground lightning protection Ground lightning protection
DO160
Voltage spike envelope shows the acceptable voltage input. Voltage waveform 2
This illustration gives the “shape” of the
lightning threat applied to LPU plug pins.
1000
Peak
600 T1 = 100 nanoseconds maximum
600
T2 = 6.4 microseconds ± 20%
0
-600 -600
-1000 0 t
Fig. 2: the modified adaptor plug 0 1 5 10 50 100 500 1000 T1 T2
and the LPU embedded on it Origin of time at the beginning of spike Time (µs)
Fig. 5
Fig. 3: transient voltage suppression
diodes inside the LPU:
A, B & C are the 115 volt phases.
N is the neutral reference.
E & F are the 28 volt interlock line
Fig. 6
A B
Fig. 4
External power receptacles
35#TSAF
80
35#TSAF
90
On the first prototype, Airbus conducted a programme of Validation and Verification
(V&V) tests, as well as electrical and lightning strike tests, using a model at Airbus’
lightning laboratory facility. All qualification tests were carried out at Leach’s laboratory.
The prototype passed all the requirements and Airbus qualified the solution.
CONCLUSION
Some regions around the world experience severe climate conditions
and lightning strikes may cause heavy damage to an aircraft.
Airbus developed a connecting plug with lightning protection for the A380,
to be installed between the ground cart power supply and the aircraft’s
power receptacle. These new adaptor plugs, developed in seven
months and delivered at the end of June 2013, deviate the eventual
electric surge to the ground and the airlines are now conducting
a six-month in-service evaluation to validate our laboratory findings.
Airbus also provided a technical report which explains the implementation
of the Lightning Protection Unit (LPU) for the A380 double-deck
Ground Power Unit connection.
Complementary LPU plug installation/removal AMM tasks
Installation:
• AMM task 24-41-00-861-801-A
• AMM task 24-41-00-861-801-A02
• AMM task 24-41-00-861-803-A
• AMM task 24-41-00-861-804-A
• AMM task 24-42-00-861-801-A
Removal:
• AMM task 24-41-00-862-801-A
• AMM task 24-41-00-862-801-A02
• AMM task 24-41-00-862-803-A
• AMM task 24-41-00-862-804-A
• AMM task 24-42-00-862-801-A
35#TSAF
90
Ground lightning protection Ground lightning protection
FE2015-B
Ext Pwr 1 FE2015-B
Ext Pwr 2
FE2015-B FE2015-A
Ext Pwr 4 Ext Pwr 3 Fig. 7
The configuration ‘A’ plug is only used for the external
‘power 3’ due to the orientation of the receptacle and the
configuration ‘B’ for the external power plugs ‘1, 2 and 4’
All aircraft are susceptible to lightning
Airbus built a mock-up in their lightning strike laboratory at Blagnac (France) to test
the lightning strike protection system. These tests are performed for every Airbus fleet
programme as shown here for the A350 XWB.
35#TSAF
01
35#TSAF
11
Handling Qualities Analysis
Handling Qualities
Damage on an Auxiliary
Power Unit drain mast
following a tail strike event
Analysis
Specific in-service
events analysis
When is an HQA report issued?
A Handling Qualities Analysis (HQA) report issued by Airbus is provided to
customers following occurrences such as:
• Hard landing leading to additional maintenance actions further to AMM
(Aircraft Maintenance Manual) findings or loads’ exceedance,
• Tail strike,
Following an in-service incident, airlines usually contact
• Runway excursion,
Airbus’ engineering support to be provided with guidelines
• Turbulence with serious injuries and/or excessive flight parameter deviations,
and/or recommendations to release the aircraft back into
• Significant over-speed event leading to maintenance inspection
service (inspections, tests, etc.), with a clear objective to as per AMM requirements,
limit as much as possible the impact on future operations. • Inappropriate aircraft handling:
- Unstable approach as per Flight Crew Operating Manual (FCOM),
Beyond technical assistance, Airbus offers to help operators - Abnormal landing,
better understand the event through a detailed analysis, mainly - Significant bounce.
based on raw data extracted from the Flight Data Recorder. • Flight out of the aircraft’s certified envelope,
• Recurrent event identified by Airbus’ Product Safety Process.
This Airbus activity, known as “Handling Qualities Analysis”
(HQA), consists of analysing specific in-service events.
It is carried out in close collaboration with several Airbus
Unexpected or major events may require structure inspections. In the case of in-service
Article by departments such as Flight & Integration Test Centre,
events (not covered in the
Vincent MILLET The major events entering the HQA scope
Design Office, Flight Operations, Flight Safety and other HQA occurrence list) on
Senior Engineer and their associated AMM tasks:
which an operator would like
Handling Qualities Product Leader relevant Airbus Customer Services engineering departments.
• Inspection after overweight/hard landing: AMM 05-51-11 dedicated Airbus analysis for
AIRBUS
specific happenings,
vincent.millet@airbus.com Airbus contributes to the safety of Airbus’ aircraft • Flight in turbulence or VMO (Maximum Operating Speed of an aircraft)
an HQA may be carried out
exceedance: AMM 05-51-17
by monitoring and analysing in-service events reported on a case-by-case basis.
• Tail strike: AMM 05-51-21
by airlines.
• Runway excursion: AMM 05-51-24
The Handling Qualities’ activity supports globally Airbus’ As a general rule, any event requiring structure inspections is referenced
in any AMM chapter 05-51-xx.
Product Safety Process (PSP) and contributes to the
continuous improvement of our products.
Speed brake not retracted below 6 ft Radio-Altimeter Speed brake not retracted below 6 ft relative altitude
OR
Ground spoilers handle armed Grand spoilers handle armed
AND
All thrust levers at idle All thrust levers at idle
Preselection
OR
condition
Two symmetric thrust in reverse Two symmetric thrust in reverse
AND
Two other levers at idle Spoilers Two other levers at idle
and
Rejected Take-Off condition ailerons
Aft wheel speed > 72 kt on one main landing gear Aft wheel speed > 72 kt on one main landing gear
OR low speed
extension
Radio-Altimeter < 6 ft Relative altitude < 6ft
initiation
AND
Both main landing gear shock absorbers compressed Both main landing gear shock absorbers compressed
Aft wheel speed > 72 kt on one main landing gear Spoilers Aft wheel speed > 72 kt on one main landing gear
and
OR
Forward wheel speed > 72 kt on one main landing gear ailerons Forward wheel speed > 72 kt on one main landing gear
high speed
AND
extension
Wheel speed < 23 kt Wheel speed < 23 kt
initiation
OR
One main landing gear shock absorbers compressed Spoilers One main landing gear shock absorbers compressed
and
Radio-Altimeter < 6 ft ailerons Relative altitude < 6 ft
AND low speed
One main landing gear shock absorbers compressed extension One main landing gear shock absorbers compressed
initiation
35#TSAF
21
35#TSAF
31
Handling Qualities Analysis Handling Qualities Analysis
Objectives of the HQA report
Independently of the aircraft’s release to service, the main customer’s concern
after an in-service event is to understand both the technical and operational
causes, in order to prevent a re-occurrence.
In-service events are recorded through the Flight Data Analysis (FDA) system and
directly reported to Airbus for investigations.
As a consequence and to help minimizing re-occurrences (and their associated
costs), Airbus performs a complete run-through of an in-service event, extracting
the scenario from the Flight Data Recording (FDR) decoding, to explain the
contributing factors. Main objectives:
The HQA, based on the FDR raw data readout, is carried out in parallel with the • Understand an event
load analysis generally required for structure inspection purposes. The aircraft’s and its origin.
release to service is out of the HQA activity’s scope.
• Provide information
The HQA report highlights the contributing factors of an event by analysing the on operational best
aircraft’s systems behaviour and the aircraft’s response versus the pilot’s input. practices to avoid
re-occurrence.
To make it easier, the analysis gathers references of available operational Airbus
aircraft documentation, as well as design enhancements whenever applicable. • Monitor the fleet
Handling Qualities
and systems’
If necessary, to better understand an operational event, the analysis could focus Analysis meeting
design consistency.
on the logic of a particular system operating during the event (i.e. Ground spoilers’ Operational information can come either from operational manuals (Flight Crew Operating Manual
automatic extension at touchdown). - FCOM, Flight Crew Training Manual - FCTM, Aircraft Flight Manual - AFM, etc.) or from Airbus’
general documentation (Flight Operations’ Briefing Notes, Getting to Grips with…, etc.)
With the HQA report in hand, the operator has a synthetic document to take appropriate decisions
or cascade down the relevant information.
On Airbus’ side, the airline’s feedback is key to monitor Airbus’ in-service fleet and to ensure
continued airworthiness, while enhancing and developing new systems and/or procedures to
Overview of conditions for the extension of ground spoilers
continuously fit operational constraints.
(Shown here for A340-500/600 aircraft)
Operational information can come either from operational manuals (Flight Crew
Operating Manual - FCOM, Flight Crew Training Manual - FCTM, Aircraft Flight
Runway Recurrent
Manual - AFM, etc.) or from Airbus’ general documentation (Flight Operations’
excursion event
briefing notes, Getting to Grips with…, etc.)
4% 14%
Handling qualities
With the HQA report in hand, the operator has a synthetic document to take appro-
priate decisions or cascade down the relevant information.
reports in 2012 Tail strike
On Airbus’ side, the airline’s feedback is key to maot nlaitnodr iAnigrbus’ in-service fleet and
Qtou eannstuitriee sC aonndti npueerdc eAnirtwagoertshiness. 6%
Hard
This allows enhancing and developing new systems and/or procedures to continu- landing
ously fit operational constraints 46%
Lateral
acceleration
at landing
53 11%
Turbulence/
Overspeed
19%
22
16
12
7
4
Hard Turbulence/ Lateral acceleration Tail strike Runway Recurrent
landing Overspeed at landing at landing excursion event
Auto-Thrust Engaged
Auto-Thrust Active
Auto-Pilot 1 Engaged
Auto-Pilot 2 Engaged
Landing Gear Squat Switch LH
Landing Gear Squat Switch RH
Landing Gear Squat Switch Nose
10
DA
-10
Elevators Right (ELVR) -- 10
Elevators Left (ELVL) - DA
Stabilizer
-10
10
Angle of Attack (AOA1)
Angle of Attack (AOA2) AOA 1 AOA 2
Pitch Angle (PTCH) 5 DA
0
2
Normal load factor (VRTG) G
1
0.5
Longitudinal load factor (LONG) G
5000
0.0
Altitude
4500 FT (ALT)
FT 150 4000
500 Ground Speed (GS)
Selected CAS PFD (SCAS PFD) 140
KT 400
Radio 130 Altimeters
300 (RALT)
120 FT
200
50
Throttle Lever Angle (TLA) TLA1 100
TLA2 DA
-0
0
80
N1 Actual N1A1
N1A2 %
0
05:04:20 05:04:24 05:04:28 05:04:32 05:04:36 05:04:40 05:04:44 05:04:48 05:04:52 05:04:56 05:05:00 05:04:20 05:04:24 05:04:28 05:04:32 05:04:36 05:04:40 05:04:44 05:04:48 05:04:52 05:04:56 05:05:00
TIME(H)
Aircraft: A320
Centre of Gravity (%) 32.16
APPROACH (LONGITUDINAL AXIS)
WeightT (LBS) 138160
Weight (KG) 62656
NOITAITINI
ERALF
NWODHCUOT
NOITAITINI
ERALF
NWODHCUOT
DA = Degree Angle
FT = Feet
G = acceleration value
KT = Knots
Auto-Pilot 1 Engaged
Auto-Pilot 2 Engaged
Landing Gear Squat Switch LH
Landing Gear Squat Switch RH
Landing Gear Squat Switch Nose
Auto Brake Med
Pitch down FD1 Engaged
side-stick orders FD2 Engaged
Side Stick Roll Position Ground Spoilers Extension (SPL1B)
Captain (STKRC) -
Side Stick Roll Position
First-officer (STKRF) - Side Stick Roll Position 20
Captain (STKRC) -
Pitch up Side Stick Roll Position DA
side-stick orders First-officer (STKRF) - -20
20
Pitch Ailerons Left (AILL) -
Angle Ailerons Right (AILR) -- DA
+5.3° -20 5
Roll Angle Roll Angle DA
+4.9°
-5
0.2 Lateral
Normal
load factor Lateral load factor (LATG) G load factor
+0.25 G
+2.89 G 0.0
Rudder
deflection
Rudder Trim Deflection (RUDT) 5 +14°
Rudder Deflection (RUDD) DA
Rudder Pedal Deflection (RUDP)
-5
0
Drift Angle DA
-5 80
Aircraft Heading
160 DEG (HDG)
Heading
Computed Airspeed (CAS_ADC) CAS value 079° 0
136 KT Ground Speed (GS) 140
Computed AirSpeed (CAS_ADC) KT
RRRRRRALT1 120 300
RRRRRRALT2 Slat flap lever Radio
Altimeters
in full landing configuration
100 200 (RALT)
Thrust levers FT RRRRRRALT1
put on idle position RRRRRRALT2
4 100
Slat Flap Lever Position (SFLP)
Thrust Radio
decrease 0 Altimeters 0
50 ft
TIME(H)
Aircraft: A320
Centre of Gravity (%) 32.16
APPROACH (LATERAL AXIS)
Weight (LBS) 138160
Weight (KG) 62656
35#TSAF
41
35#TSAF
51
Handling Qualities Analysis Handling Qualities Analysis
Raw data decoding
Using a specific Airbus tool, raw flight data is displayed
as graphic charts for the event’s analysis.
Recorded flight data in this format allows a detailed analysis
of aircraft behaviour and aircraft systems at the time of the event.
This example highlights some of the relevant parameters
used to analyse a hard landing event of an A320 aircraft.
35#TSAF
61
35#TSAF
71
Handling Qualities Analysis Handling Qualities Analysis
Y Digital/Solid State Quick
R
O Flight Access
T Data Recorder
A
Recorder
D
N - Copy of Flight Data Recorder
A - In-service event analysis - Easy access
M - Frozen dataframe
OPERATOR
- Crash protected Digital Smart
In-service event
Aids Access
Recorder Recorder
- Maintenance
and fleet monitoring
- Customized dataframe
Airbus Engineering Support
What data is used?
For absolute accuracy, Airbus only analyses raw data, either from the Flight Data
Recorder (FDR) or the maintenance recorder (QAR). In exceptional circumstances,
raw data from the Digital Access Recorder (DAR) may be used, providing that the Flight raw data decoding
corresponding DAR database is supplied at the same time.
Airbus’ WISE (World In-Service Experience) solution (ref: EngOps-16063) provides
a list of usable data formats (file extensions) and a list of AMM tasks relative to the
procedure of flight raw data recovery.
Handling
These two
Loads analysis
Qualities
are done
as per AMM
Analysis
requirements in parallel
(HQA)
Maintenance recommendations
provided by relevant Airbus
Customer Services’ engineering Handling Qualities Analysis report
specialists for aircraft release
Airbus delivers the HQA report within five weeks
of receiving the FDR raw data
OPERATOR Engineering / Maintenance Flight Operations Flight Safety
LANOITPO
Usual data requested before starting
a Handling Qualities Analysis:
• Flight Data Recorder raw data • Pilot’s report
• Post Flight Report • Weather data
• Load and Trim sheet • MEL (Minimum Equipment List)
open items
• Aircraft Condition Monitoring
System reports (Load Report • Part Numbers (PN) of the
15, Over-Speed Report 35, etc.) aircraft’s computers involved
in the occurrence
• Trouble-Shooting Data (TSD)
Applicable
process
for in-service
Once the data has been retrieved from the aircraft, it must be sent to Airbus either
by the airlines field representative or directly using Airbus’ File Transfer Service events
Plus (FTS+) on AirbusWorld (https://ftsplus.airbus.com).
GLOSSARY
FDR (Flight Data Recorder): Mandatory device that permanently works from
the first engine start until the end of the flight. Thanks to a large memory
capacity, it records many flight hours and numerous flight parameters.
QAR (Quick Access Recorder): Copy of the FDR and thus records the same
data. It allows a quick and easy recovery of the raw data recorded in FDR.
Only raw data is used for the event analysis.
DAR (Digital Access Recorder): Mostly maintenance and fleet monitoring
oriented and therefore should not be used for event analysis as the data
frame can be customized by the operators.
As a consequence some useful parameters could be missing to perform
a detailed HQA.
PFR (Post Flight Report): Lists and displays after landing the ECAM
(Electronic Centralized Aircraft Monitor) warnings and system faults that
occurred during the flight.
ACMS (Aircraft Condition Monitoring System): Recovers the data supplied
by various systems for trend monitoring. It is also possible to use the
ACMS for specific troubleshooting.
35#TSAF
81
35#TSAF
91
Wind reconstruction
Whenever relevant, Airbus initiates
a wind reconstruction (3 axes)
to better assess the effect of each
wind component (vertical, lateral
and longitudinal) on the aircraft
behaviour.
In the same way, in case of an aircraft
performance issue, the aircraft’s
Gross Weight (GW) and Centre of The HQA report handed to the operators includes the following information:
Gravity (CG) can be re-computed and
• After validation of recorded parameters, a factual description of the event based compared to the data used/inserted
on the plots extracted from the FDR raw data, and the technical explanation
by the crew.
of the contributing factors,
• Summary of the technical data provided to Airbus,
• Operational information relative to the event,
Lateral wind’s influence on an aircraft’s trajectory
• Airbus’ operational documentation in which the operator can find useful
information to prevent a re-occurrence. The information can come either from
operational documentation (FCOM, QRH, FCTM) or Airbus’ general
brochures (Getting to Grips with…, Briefing Notes, etc.),
• New system features or enhancements that can be installed through Airbus
Service Bulletins (SB). These upgrades may be means to minimize
re-occurrences (i.e. Pitch Limit Indicator and Pitch Auto Call-Out to limit tail
strike events).
CONCLUSION
Handling Qualities Analysis report provides operators with a synthetic document addressing significant in-service
reported events.
Airbus’ operators receive a detailed analysis highlighting the contributing factors, to ease the understanding of the
in-service event. Its intention is to help the operators prevent re-occurrences. When necessary, Airbus provides
information to the operator on the eventual system improvements.
Thanks to this activity, Airbus proactively supports its operators in maximizing their operations and preventing
re-occurrence, with safety as first objective.
“Thank you for the new handling report. “Your report is very “I would like to thank Airbus’ HQA
Wind 310°/12 Kt 000° (North) It enables us to better understand what professional and very team for providing us with the
happened from a technical point and is an useful.” extensive analysis of this event.
315° 045° invaluable help for our internal investigation. The report was straightforward
We especially welcome your prompt replies Mr. Qingchen WANG and data analysis was complete.
and the detailed and precise answers to our Vice-President Safety This has already been forwarded
Heading
specific questions. Our company’s Flight to the training department to be
085°
270° 090° Safety department highly appreciates your included in our in-service events,
assistance. Once again thank you for your and will form part of our special
invaluable support.” training session.”
Peter KRUPA Captain MARALIT
135°
225° Training Captain A320 Chief Investigator A319/A320 Chief Pilot
180° Wind sector
09
10.620
10.615
10.610
10.605
10.600
10.595
Longitude
edutitaL
Handling Qualities Analysis Handling Qualities Analysis
A380 crosswind
landing campaign
in Reykjavik
Centre (Iceland)
of Gravity
Y aircraft
(pitch axis)
Z aircraft
(yaw axis)
X aircraft
(roll axis)
10 Kt Wind scale
Trajectory
Touch
down
47.045 47.040 47.035 47.030 47.025 47.020 47.015 47.010 47.005 47.000
Airlines’ feedback
Wind information
recorded on the FDR
35#TSAF
02
35#TSAF
12
A350 XWB Electrical Structure Network
A350 XWB Electrical
Electrical principle
Your usual home electrical installation
Structure Network
Electrical Equipment
power centre
Earth
A330 (metallic aircraft)
Electrical Structure Network (ESN) area Electrical Equipment
power centre
Metallic Bonding Network (MBN) area
Aircraft
power
source
Metallic aircraft structure
The Electrical Structure Network is necessary to ensure:
• Proper functioning of the aircraft systems
A350 XWB (CFRP fuselage)
• Aircraft’s structure integrity
(loss of mechanical properties in the Carbon Fibre
Electrical Equipment
Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) due to the joule effect)
power centre
The use of carbon for aircraft structures on the A350 XWB
• Staff and passenger safety
Aircraft
(Extra Wide Body) presents several advantages in terms of
power
source
weight and maintenance, but leads to differences in system
EleMcetrtiaclalicl Satirruccratuftr es tNruecttwuorerk
functionning, compared to a metallic structure. This article
Functional current (grounding)
presents the Electrical Structure Network (ESN), and its Fault current (bonding)
Power supply CFRP element
particularities with regards to maintenance, the associated Inherent electrical link through
mechanical assembly
documentation and the proposed training means.
To achieve the same electrical and environmental performance of aircraft metallic
structures, two different technical solutions have been implemented on the A350
XWB depending on the area and the expected function.
In the pressurized fuselage a highly distributed conductive network; known as the
Electrical Structure Network (ESN) is achieved thanks to both existing metallic
structure parts and to specific ESN parts.
This network offers the electrical and environmental conditions required for the
correct functioning of aircraft systems. Due to the discrete characteristics and
electrical properties of carbon, compared to a metallic fuselage, particular attention
Christophe LOCHOT (left)
should be given to maintaining the ESN system’s performance during the entire life
ESN Design Leader
of the aircraft.
Expert in Electrical Systems Engineering
AIRBUS
Elsewhere a Metallic Bonding Network (MBN) has already been used. For example
christophe.lochot@airbus.com
on the wings, tail cone, empennage and belly fairing of the A380. It consists of a
network of metallic parts, electrically bonded together and used for a failure current
Damien SLOMIANOWSKI (right)
return path, equipment bonding, as well as lightning and Electro-Static Discharge
Engineer
protection. This network is neither used as a functional current path (grounding),
Aircraft Electrical Installation & Standard Items
nor to distribute the voltage reference to the equipment located in the area.
Customer Services Engineering
These functions are ensured thanks to dedicated cables routed in the harnesses.
AIRBUS
Each MBN sub-network (wings, belly fairing, etc.) is connected to the ESN.
damien.slomianowski@airbus.com
A350 XWB Electrical Structure Network
Parts supporting The specific ESN components are the:
• Cables used to create the link between the crown level,
the ESN
and the passenger floor or cargo. This cable is routed by itself
and sometimes in a harness.
• Different types of raceways, located in the crown area
and under the cabin floor.
• Different types of flexible junctions providing additional
means to either reinforce electrical bonding between main
Electrical
elements (e.g. crossbeam, frames, etc.) or create the electrical
Structure Network
continuity (e.g. between two raceways).
definition
ESN is a metallic redundant and
passive network made of more than
6,000 parts. 40% of these parts have
specifically been defined for the ESN
(specific components), the other ones
are metallic parts already installed in
the aircraft for mechanical functions.
ESN is composed of different element
families, which are:
• Structure metallic elements
(e.g. metallic frames, crossbeams,
seat tracks, roller tracks, etc.)
Raceways Zones where the raceways are installed
and their assembly,
• Mechanical elements
(e.g. parts supporting equipment
such as the electronics bay rack,
mechanical junctions, cabin
furnishing structures in the crown
area) and their assembly,
• Specific ESN components
(raceways with approximately
2.000 flexible junctions all along
the fuselage and cables).
35#TSAF
22
35#TSAF
32
A350 XWB Electrical Structure Network
Type-3 Type-1
raceway raceway
Type-2
raceway
Type-1 Type-2
raceway raceway
ESN cable
Metallic frames
Type-4
Type-3 Type-4
raceway
raceway raceway
Pax door
surroundings
Cabin floor
crossbeam
H-strut Cockpit crossbeam
Avionic rack chassis
Avionic compartment
crossbeam
Cargo crossbeam
Cargo roller tracks
Pax door
ESN cable
H-strut
Cabin floor
crossbeams
Cargo door
Lower shell frame
Cargo crossbeams
CONCLUSION
To provide a similar electrical environment offered by metallic fuselages
for the aircraft systems, Electrical Structure Network (ESN) has been
introduced in composite fuselages. This metallic electrical network is
mainly built from elements with mechanical functions already present
in the aircraft.
Composite fuselages, even with the addition of the ESN, offer the
optimal solution in terms of weight and electrical performance
while minimizing operational and maintenance costs for airlines.
For maintenance and aircraft modifications, some comparable
precautions to those applicable for the electrical power generation
and distribution have to be taken. Airlines will receive the appropriate
Airbus technical documentation and dedicated support for their
A350 XWB. Airbus has already implemented appropriate training
courses for operators who wish to learn more about ESN, before
the A350 XWB Entry-Into-Service.
35#TSAF
42
35#TSAF
52
A350 XWB Electrical Structure Network A350 XWB Electrical Structure Network
ESN in use:
In order not to isolate an ESN element (loss of local redundancy), ESN shall be
managed with care and generic rules shall be respected.
Maintenance
a - Installation/Removal/Repair:
• In case of repair, electrical properties have to be maintained between
the different elements.
• To validate the flexible junction installation (surface preparation, application
of the right torque value), a test under high current will have to be performed
for each electrical connection.
• To remove and install ESN parts Airbus’ documentation needs to be followed
in order to ensure the operator’s safety.
• Precautions are similar to the ones applicable to electrical systems on legacy
programmes. Training
b - Scheduled inspection Airbus provides training that allows
The ESN in-service integrity is ensured thanks to the scheduled maintenance, airlines to increase their ESN
to be performed in accordance with the documentation found in AirN@v. knowledge and to train electricians or
mechanics for maintenance purposes:
Scheduled maintenance will be performed through general visual inspections
Flexible junctions ATA 24 Electrical Structure Network
during the zonal inspections planned, every six years for ESN parts located
Maintenance (levels 2 and 3)
in the nose fuselage (and especially close to the PVR) and every twelve years
and the ESN Measurement/
for the complete fuselage.
Test tool,
The Point of Voltage Reference (PVR)
Aircraft modification ATA 51 Electrical Structure Network
Located in the nose area at the passenger floor level, the PVR is the zero volt (ESN) and Metallic Bonding
reference shared by all aircraft equipment. The neutral of the aircraft alternating The ESN modification has to be treated with precaution. In case of operator Network (MBN) awareness.
current power sources and the cold point of the aircraft’s direct current sources modification needs, the following cases shall be considered:
These are part of mandatory courses
are connected to the PVR, as well as the neutral of the external ground carts. • In case of system modification or addition, an electrical load analysis has to be for B1 and B2 aircraft maintenance
The PVR is made of metallic frames, in the nose fuselage area, longitudinal beams done for return current in order to guarantee the performance of the ESN licences (specific aeronautical
(called PVR-bars) and their associated flexible junctions. (current injection scenarios). This ESN Electrical Load Analysis is similar to the qualifications).
one performed for the electrical power generation and distribution system.
ESN parts documentation • Any ESN physical modifications have to be analysed by Airbus before their
implementation.
ESN elements are described in current AirN@v documentation (Airbus technical
documentation software):
ESN
• In the Illustrated Part Data (IPD), all ESN parts will be specifically flagged,
• In the Maintenance Procedure (MP) all necessary maintenance instructions
will be described to ensure the continued airworthiness of the aircraft.
ESN parts
These instructions will be located in chapter 20 (e.g. the bonding procedure)
and chapter 24-77 (named Electrical Structural Network, new chapter introduced identification
for the A350 XWB). This dedicated chapter will deal with generic safety on aircraft
precautions which apply to all ESN maintenance/repair activities.
All ESN tasks will refer to this chapter, In order to ease the ESN
identification and maintenance
• In the Electrical Standard Practices Manual (ESPM), it will give descriptive on the A350 XWB, the specific
data and procedures for the electrical standard parts’ installations ESN components, as its
(e.g. raceways, flexible junctions, etc.). It will provide instructions for part secondary structure parts, are
removal and installation, damage assessment and repair solutions to be identified with a green label.
applied, if deemed necessary,
• In the structural repair manual, allowable damage limits and repairs will take
into account the ESN requirements.
35#TSAF
62
35#TSAF
72
Towards a high European air traffic demand
Towards a high European
A partnership programme
For the first time, all aviation players are involved in the three phases of the
air traffic demand pan-European modernization project:
• The ‘definition phase’ which delivered the ATM master plan defining the content,
the development and deployment plans of the next generation of ATM systems.
This definition phase was led by Eurocontrol, and co-funded by the European
Commission under the Trans European Network-Transport programme
Airbus’ involvement in SESAR and executed by a large consortium of all air transport stakeholders.
• The ‘development phase’ which produces the required new generation
of technological systems, components and operational procedures as defined
in the SESAR ATM Master Plan and Work Programme.
Time has come to act for the European airspace as air
• The ‘deployment phase’ will see the large scale production and implementation
traffic is expected to increase. Currently, constraints in
of the new ATM infrastructure, composed of fully harmonized and interoperable
Europe’s fragmented airspace bring extra costs of close components that guarantee high performance air transport activities in Europe.
to 5 billion Euros each year to airlines and their customers.
SESAR Joint Undertaking (SJU)
In order to avoid the risk of saturation of Europe’s skies
Taking into account the number of actors involved in SESAR, the financial resources
and airports, the European Commission launched an and the technical expertise needed, it was vital for the rationalization of activities to
set up a legal entity pursuant to Article 171 of the European Treaty (on the
ambitious initiative in 2004: the Single European Sky (SES).
functioning of the European Union) capable of ensuring the management of the
funds assigned to the SESAR project during its ‘development phase’.
While the Single European Sky is a high level goal at a political level, SESAR Hence, the SJU was established in 2007 to implement the technology pillar of the
Article by (Single European Sky ATM Research) represents its technological pillar SES and, in this respect, is in charge of the SESAR project development phase, i.e.
Daniel CHIESA (left) and is coordinated by the SESAR Joint Undertaking (SJU), a public and private is the guardian and the executor of the European ATM Master Plan.
SESAR Work Package 11.1 Leader partnership co-financed by Eurocontrol and the aviation industry.
AIRBUS
daniel.chiesa@airbus.com Within the SESAR programme, Airbus is leading the “Aircraft systems” and “Flight
The most recent version of the ATM Master Plan, approved in 2012, identifies
and Wing Operations Centres”(FOC/WOC) Work Packages (WP). Airbus also
Joseph ABOROMMAN (right) contributes to several other WPs in which entities such as Air Navigation Service the essential operational changes that need to be implemented in three main
SESAR Work Package 11.1 Project Manager Providers (ANSP), airports or equipment manufacturers are involved. steps to lead to the full deployment of the new SESAR concept by 2030:
AIRBUS In addition, Airbus also provides industrial support to the SESAR Joint
joseph.aboromman@airbus.com Undertaking (SJU) for managing the overall SESAR programme. Step 1 Time based operations - concentrates on unlocking latent capability
particularly by improving information sharing to optimize network effects.
In this article, we will introduce the domains in which the SESAR programme
Step 2 Trajectory based operations - develops the System Wide Information
focuses on, and demonstrate in particular where Airbus has taken part in this
Management (SWIM) and initial trajectory management concepts
global partnership.
to increase efficiency.
Single European Sky (SES)
Step 3 Performance based operations/improvements - will introduce a full
The Single European Sky initiative has been launched to reform the architecture of and integrated trajectory management with new separation modes
the European Air Traffic Management (ATM). It proposes a legislative approach to to achieve the long term political goal of SES.
meet the airspace’s future capacity and safety needs at a European, rather than a
local level.
Contrary to the United States, Europe does not have a single sky, one in which air The ATM Master Plan also includes the deployment baseline operational and
navigation is managed at the European level. Furthermore, European airspace is technological changes which are pre-requisite to operate and support the essential
amongst the busiest in the world with over 33,000 flights on busy days and a high operational changes of ‘step 1’.
airport density. This makes air traffic control even more complex. Compared to the ATM performance in 2005, SESAR’s targets for both the
‘deployment baseline’ and the ‘step 1’ are the following:
SESAR
• A 27 % increase in airspace capacity,
As part of the SES initiative, SESAR (Single European Sky ATM Research) represents • An associated improvement in safety so that the total number of ATM-induced
its technological and operational dimension. The SESAR programme will help incidents and serious or risk bearing incidents do not increase despite traffic
create a “paradigm shift”, supported by state-of-the-art and innovative technology, growth generated by SESAR (i.e. through air-space and airport-capacity increase),
in order to give Europe a high-performance air traffic control infrastructure.
• A 2.8 % reduction per flight in environmental impact,
This programme promotes and ensures the interoperability at global level with other
• A 6 % reduction in cost per flight.
initiatives in other parts of the world, by following the ICAO Global Air Navigation
Plan (GANP) and ICAO’s Aviation System Blocks Upgrades (ASBU) concept.
35#TSAF
82
35#TSAF
92
Towards a high European air traffic demand Towards a high European air traffic demand
SESAR programme System development activities
The SESAR programme is divided in several Work Packages (WP) composed of several
projects. The WPs are also divided in several categories and sub-categories. WP 9 Aircraft Systems (Airbus leader)
The scope of WP 9 covers the required evolutions of the aircraft platform,
Airbus is the leader of WP 9 and 11.1
in particular to progressively introduce 4D trajectory management functions
(three spatial dimensions, plus time) in mainline, regional and business aircraft.
“A Work Package for every step of the flight.”
The future, performance-based European ATM system, as defined in the SESAR
Key steps: ATM Master Plan, foresees greater integration and optimum exploitation of the
• Time based operations aircraft. In order to reach this objective, a series of ‘capability levels’ have been
scheduled. Each capability level provides a stepped performance improvement,
• 4D trajectory operations
WP 15 WP 16 synchronized across all components (and stakeholders) of the ATM system.
• Performance based
WP B & C This work package aims at:
operations over a
SWIM/IP network WP 9 & 11 • Developing and validating at aircraft level all airborne functions identified
WP 3
TOC Top Of Climb TOC WP 4 & 10 TOD in the SESAR ATM Master Plan.
TOD Top Of Descent • Ensuring operational & functional consistency across stakeholder airborne
segments (commercial aircraft, business aviation, general aviation, military
Network
aircraft, Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS), etc.).
Information WP 5 &10 WP 8 & 14 WP 5 & 10
management • Identifying technical solutions for different airborne platform types such as
Transversal mainline aircraft, regional aircraft and business jets.
WP 7 & 13
Airport • Insuring global interoperability and coordination with important external
WP 6 & 12 WP 6 & 12
TMA initiatives such as NextGen (Next Generation) in the United States.
En route
WP 10 En-Route & Approach ATC Systems
Operational activities
WP 10 designs, specifies and validates the En-route and TMA-ATC
(Terminal Air Traffic Control) systems’ evolutions for enhancing trajectory
management, separation modes, controller tools, safety nets, airspace
WP 4 En-Route Operations management supporting functions and tools, queue management
and route optimisation features.
The scope of the En-Route Operations WP is to provide the operational concept
description for the En-Route Operations and perform its validation.
WP 12 Airport Systems
WP 5 Terminal Operations WP 12 encompasses all Research and Development (R&D) activities to define,
design, specify and validate the airport systems needed to support the SESAR
The scope of this WP is to manage, co-ordinate and perform all
ATM target concept.
activities required to define and validate the ATM target concept (i.e. concept of
operations and system architecture) for the arrival and departure phases of flight.
WP 13 Network Information Management System
WP 6 Airport Operations WP 13 covers the system and technical R&D tasks related to the Network
Information Management System (NIMS), the Advanced Airspace Management
The scope of the Airport Operations WP is to refine and validate the concept
System (AAMS) and the Aeronautical Information Management System (AIMS).
definition through the preparation and the coordination of its operational validation
process. The concept addresses developments associated with the “airside”
elements, such as airfield capacity management and continuous best use of
WP 15 Non-Avionic CNS System
available infrastructure under all weather conditions.
WP 15 (Non-Avionic CNS System) addresses CNS (Communication, Navigation
& Surveillance) technologies’ development and validation, also considering their
WP 7 Network Operations compatibility with the military and general aviation user needs.
The scope of this WP covers the evolution of services in the business development
and planning phases to prepare and support trajectory-based operations including
airspace management, collaborative flight planning and Network Operations Plan
(NOP).
WP E SESAR Long Term and Innovative Research
This WP addresses long-term and innovative research. WP E does not have a fixed
work programme but solicits proposals from the research community for the
formation of networks of expertise and for project works.
Courtesy of Eurocontrol
Towards a high European air traffic demand Towards a high European air traffic demand
35#TSAF
03
35#TSAF
13
Operational and system SWIM Transverse Parallel
development activities Connecting activities programmes
the ATM world
WP 11.1 Flight and Wing Operations Centres The concept of SWIM (System Wide WP B Target Concept and Architecture Maintenance Similar initiatives to SESAR
(Airbus leader) Information Management) covers WP B, as a transverse work package, provides strategic and conceptual guidance regarding the Air Traffic Management
a complete change in paradigm of how for the entire work programme including all threads (operational, technical transformation programmes were
The Flight Operations Centre (FOC) is the Operations Control Center for a civil
information is managed along its full and SWIM) to ensure the consistent development of SESAR improvements. launched in other parts of the world;
airspace user and the Wing Operations Centre (WOC) is the Operations Centre
lifecycle and across the whole European for example, in the United States
for a military airspace user. ATM system. WP C Master Plan Maintenance through the Next Generation
The scope of the Master Plan Maintenance WP is to administrate the up-to-date Air Transport System (NextGen)
WP 11.1 covers the basis of operation for the future FOC/WOC, its role, WP 8 Information Management maintenance tasks of the ATM Master Plan, to monitor the progress of its while in Japan with the Collaborative
responsibilities, interactions and exchanges with other actors from an operational
The scope of this WP is to develop SWIM development and its implementation. Actions for Renovation of the Air
point of view, taking in consideration the fundamental systems’ architectures.
which is the ‘intranet for ATM’. Traffic System (CARATS).
The FOC/WOC system will enable airlines and military operators running this system WP 3 Validation Infrastructure Adaptation and Integration
to reach the performance and safety targets of the SESAR environment. WP 14 SWIM WP 3 involves all relevant European ATM stakeholders to benefit from existing Conversely, Europe and the
The main objectives of WP 11.1 include: Technical Architecture expertise, tools and validation platforms, to make available a reference Validation United States agreed to cooperate
• Defining FOC/WOC and non FOC/WOC operational concepts from the airspace This WP is the follow-up of the and Verification infrastructure to be used during the SESAR development phase. on SESAR and NextGen through
user’s perspective. SWIM- SUIT* FP6 Commission. It will use a Memorandum of Cooperation
as an input the SWIM-SUIT deliverables WP 16 R&D Transversal Areas (MoC) in civil aviation research
• Ensuring overall consistency of the business/mission trajectory management
and align them with the SESAR Work The scope of this WP covers the improvements needed to adapt the Transversal and development.
concept from the airspace user’s perspective.
Programme components. Area (TA) management system practices to SESAR, as well as towards
• Defining FOC/WOC operations and non FOC/WOC operations operational
an integrated management system in the fields of safety, security, environment,
and performance requirements for each element of the FOC/WOC and for * SWIM-Suit is shorthand for SWIM-SUpported
contingency and human performance.
each airspace user category. by Innovative Technologies.
• Getting the buy-in of the airspace user’s community.
• Providing the system definition, system requirements and system architecture
Business/mission
for a generic FOC/WOC that meet the user’s needs for a FOC/WOC operating
in the SESAR target ATM network. trajectory
• Providing the system definition, system requirements and system architecture
“Business trajectory” relates to civil
enabling the airspace users that are not supported by FOC, an access to the
users, and “mission trajectory” relates
SESAR ATM environment.
to military users.
• To develop prototypes which demonstrate that requirements are compliant
A 4D trajectory which expresses the
with the production of open standards as developed and used in the entire
intentions of the user with or without
SESAR project philosophy.
constraints includes both ground
• To perform the pre-operational validation of solutions developed within WP 11.1. and airborne segments of the aircraft
Courtesy of Eurocontrol
operation (gate-to-gate) and is built
WP 11.2 Meteorological Information Services from, and updated with, the most
WP 11.2 addresses the critical dependency between weather, the environment, timely and accurate data available.
and the SESAR programme. WP 11.2 provides the SJU and its partners with the
CONCLUSION
opportunity to properly integrate weather into the SESAR programme
to enhance the likelihood of success of its final outcomes, and ensuring
successful operational implementation of the future air transport system. The European Air Traffic Management (ATM) system is operating close to its limits and is facing the challenge of continuously
GLOSSARY
As the Meteorological (MET) service federating project within the programme, growing demand in air transport. The Single European Sky (SES) initiative was created at a political level in order to achieve
WP 11.2 will ensure consistency and coordination of the MET architecture, 4D 4 dimensions (3 spatial dimensions + time) the performance objectives and the targets of the future ATM system in Europe.
systems and services used by all SESAR projects. ANSP Air Navigation Service Provider
The SESAR (Single European Sky ATM Research) programme, representing the technological dimension of the SES, has
ATM Air Traffic Management
brought together for the first time in European ATM history, the major stakeholders in European aviation to develop the ATM
CNS Communication Navigation Surveillance
target concept through new processes, procedures and supporting technologies.
FOC Flight Operations Centre
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization
Airbus, as one of the SESAR members, is leading two particular Work Packages (WP) of the SESAR programme, therefore
NextGen Next Generation (USA)
contributing to safer and more efficient skies. Airspace users expect their requirements for the ATM system to be better
SES Single European Sky
accommodated in order to strengthen the air transport value chain. The ATM target concept is centred around the characteristic
SESAR Single European Sky ATM Research
of the business trajectory with the purpose of operating a flight as close as the preferred trajectory by the airspace user.
SJU SESAR Joint Undertaking
SWIM System Wide Information Management The challenge of developing the new ATM architecture through a wide cooperation between all the involved stakeholders
TMA Terminal control Area implies a long and strong coordination. Hence, the SESAR programme has, and will, ensure its continuous and consistent
WOC Wing Operations Centre development for the years to come.
WP Work Package
35#TSAF
23
35#TSAF
33
Volcanic eruptions - Ashes to AVOID
Volcanic eruptions
Ashes to AVOID
Following the Eyafjallajökull volcano eruption in April 2010,
airspace was shut down due to the massive ash cloud
prediction covering most parts of northern Europe.
This event grounded aircraft for several days, with an
immediate economic impact for airlines. On top of this, 1111::2200::0000
stranded passengers expressed dissatisfaction, not
1111::0000::0000
understanding why aircraft could not fly through an
invisible ash cloud.
1100::0000::0000
A visible ash plume containing larger particles of ash spread 1100::5500::0000
over several kilometres from the volcano vent, but the
1100::2244::0000
dominant winds dispersed and pushed finer particles much 1100::3355::0000
further, not visible to the eye but nevertheless, still there.
Concerted efforts have been made by Airbus’ customer The A400M had been prepared
with special devices employing the
easyJet, Nicarnia Aviation of Norway and Airbus, with the
differential of the fuselage’s pressure
help of technicians from the Duesseldorf University of Applied in flight, controlled to an elevated level,
allowing dispersal of the ash from the
Sciences Laboratory of Environmental Measurement
barrels into the air behind the aircraft.
Techniques, to make a significant step in the development
The A400M spiralled in a 3 km
of a system to be able to “see” fine particles of volcanic ash
diameter circle, climbing each half
suspended in the air in order to “avoid” them. turn by a small amount, ensuring it
Article by
would not enter the ash cloud it had
Manfred BIRNFELD This article will take you through the flight test performed in
produced.
Senior Flight Test Engineer/Senior Expert
October 2013 to validate a new system called simply: AVOID
AIRBUS
manfred.birnfeld@airbus.com (Airborne Volcanic Object Imaging Detector). Two teams of four trained ash handlers
emptied all the ash barrels according
to a time schedule which, together with
In May of this year, using the very first A400M, close to one metric ton of genuine
the geometry of the circles flown with
volcanic ash from the Eyafjallajökull was collected from the Icelandic Institute of
help of a precise bank angle mode,
volcanology.
would produce the ash cloud in the
The ash was then taken to Alès in southern France for milling, reducing the grain desired uniformity and concentrations
size to about 25 microns, to resemble fine volcanic ash that had been transported targeted.
in the atmosphere over more than 2000 km.
Volcanic eruptions - Ashes to AVOID Volcanic eruptions - Ashes to AVOID
35#TSAF
43
35#TSAF
53
The second aircraft on the scene was a small twin piston engine propeller aircraft,
a Diamond DA 42 from the manufacturer’s plant in Vienna. Brought over and
operated by scientists from Düsseldorf’s University of Applied Science, it was fitted
with special sampling devices, able to detect and measure in-situ the content
and the characteristics of the volcanic ash cloud produced by the A400M.
Tasks for the DIAMOND DA 42 MPP aircraft during the experiment:
• Perform in-situ ash measurements with high accuracy
• Track the plume geometry
• Determine the size distribution of the ash particles
• Transmit the measurement result on-line to the A340
A third aircraft, A340 MSN 001 carried the AVOID sensor for which the cloud had
been made. The device consists of a pair of infrared (IFR) cameras intended
to capture the IFR signature of the scenery in front of the aircraft. The camera’s IFR
imagery is analysed using filtering techniques which dissociate the IFR absorption
in order to identify when absorption by volcanic ash particles has taken place.
It uses this technique to detect the presence of volcanic ash in front of the aircraft.
At an altitude of more than 30,000 feet, it would be able to “see” ash of a significant
concentration at a distance of 100 km. The more ash in the air, the higher the
measured IFR absorption will be. When perfectly calibrated, the measurement can
be developed to give a reliable reading of the “ash loading” (mass per surface area,
in g/m2) ahead of the aircraft.
The experiment was the first time the AVOID sensor was exposed to realistic
volcanic ash while being carried by a civil transport aircraft.
After the volcanic eruptions of Eyafjallajökull (2010) and Grimsvötn (2011) in Iceland,
Inside the ‘cavernous’ A400M MSN 001
Airbus teamed up with Nicarnia Aviation, the developer of the AVOID sensor, and
preparing for volcanic ash distribution
easyJet who is sponsoring AVOID’s development, aiming to make proof of concept
tests and develop the sensor.
Initial trials had been carried out in July 2012 which validated the installation Airbus Flight Test Specialist Julie MAUTIN
principle and explored the flight envelope of the A340 with the sensor installed. and Céline COHEN of Assystem using pressure
One of the main purposes of these trials was to look for absence of false detections. differentials to ‘vacuum’ the barrels of ash
The sensor was therefore not intended to be exposed to volcanic ash during these
trials. However, on one occasion on a long flight south, the sensor detected the
presence of Saharian dust in the air. This dust’s IFR absorption is very similar to
volcanic ash since it contains similar chemical components.
The entire test was filmed by a fourth aircraft: Aerovision’s specially equipped
Corvette to video and photograph the three aircraft at work in flight.
35#TSAF
63
35#TSAF
73
Volcanic eruptions - Ashes to AVOID Volcanic eruptions - Ashes to AVOID
o o o o
Aircraft Lon: -2.097 Lat: 44.991 Alt: 5008 ft Pitch: 3.669 Heading= 9.646
15000
10000
What’s next?
5000
Although the results of this experiment are very encouraging, the AVOID sensor is still in a prototype condition. It will need
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 development with automatisms replacing the scientist’s individual intervention for the IFR data interpretation. That will take
HORIZONTAL DISTANCE (KM)
some time.
The data produced needs to be analysed and integrated into the big puzzle of information necessary to make flying in the
vicinity of volcanic ash safe. There are several interesting work packages to be defined. It could well be that in the future a pilot
will be given information that integrates AVOID sensor’s data. It will be Airbus’ task to work on an integrated system and
Mass loading (g/m2) develop, potentially together with a system manufacturer, the necessary system philosophy and cockpit interface.
0.00 0.20 0.40 0.60 0.80 1.00 In the meantime, easyJet plans to develop a stand alone solution, with the aim of producing an instrument which can enhance
flight safety when operating in the vicinity of volcanic ash clouds. This would be used conforming to the rules of a safety
assessment integrating all available data from forecasting, satellite imagery and local observation.
CONCLUSION
The Icelandic volcano eruptions in 2010 and 2011 brought home the necessity to be able to measure the risk
of volcanic ash contamination of air space and avoid grounding traffic unnecessarily.
A joint initiative between easyJet, Nicarnia Aviation and Airbus set about developing an air contamination
detection system named AVOID. The Duesseldorf University of Applied Sciences’ Laboratory of Environmental
Measurement Techniques, participated, providing key services and in-situ measurement techniques.
This system was tested in October 2013 with a small cloud of fine ash released into the atmosphere by an
Airbus A400M. It demonstrated the AVOID sensor detection capapility. Real time data was available from in-situ
measurements. Ash measurement data were transmitted in real time from a DA42 sampling the cloud, to an
A340; these were compared with infrared observations made by the AVOID system. AVOID’s sensors captured
WARNING: ASH ASH ASH the volcanic ash cloud from a distance of 50 km. Given the size and low “mass loading” of the cloud, the results
are encouraging.
In time AVOID sensors could be integrated into aircraft systems to inform pilots of ash presence at up to
100 km ahead.
Volcanoes are not really predictable, and they’re unstoppable. Their ash clouds significantly disturb flying if the
threat of the particles is not measurable. AVOID is destined to help us avoid situations like the traffic grounding
for Eyafjallajökull.
)TEEF(
EDUTITLA
Brightness temperature (K) - Broadband channel (Ch1)
248 254 261 268 274 281 288
Heading
TIME: 10:57:58 UT DISTANCE: 40.7 km
15000
10000
5000
-3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
HORIZONTAL DISTANCE (KM)
)TEEF(
EDUTITLA
Infrared imagery The trials in July 2012 were successful and gave the initiative for the next step:
exposure to a real volcanic ash cloud.
Impossible to discriminate ash from other clouds
As the precise time and place of a volcanic eruption are absolutely unpredictable,
the idea of making a small, but representative cloud was rapidly born.
The A400M which was conducting flight tests had the capabilities to precisely
execute the spiralling flight path required and it had the cargo hold allowing a team
to work at the dispersion of the ash.
The ash release and detection experiment made on 30th October 2013 represents
a success in several aspects:
• We have been able to artificially create a representative volcanic ash cloud
with the predicted size and distribution.
• The ash particles measured inside the cloud were identified as being very
similar if not identical to ash particles captured over Europe during the 2010
Eyafjallajökull eruption.
• It demonstrated real time data availability from in-situ measurements.
The ash measurement data were transmitted in real time from the DA42
to the A340 MSN 001 using satellite data communication and a simple
Internet site.
And the main result: the AVOID sensor images captured the volcanic ash cloud from
a distance of 50 km. Given the small size of our cloud and the resulting low “mass
loading”, it was a great success. It is now realistic to believe that detection
of significant ash loading at a distance of 100 km is feasible.
Detection of volcanic ash using AVOID
Heading
TIME: 10:57:58 UT DISTANCE: 40.7 km
FAST
from the PAST
There wouldn’t be any future
without the experience of the past.
35#TSAF
83
egatireh
etaroproc
SDAE
fo
ysetruoc
otohP
35#TSAF
93
We’ve got it covered
Around the clock, around the world,
Airbus has more than 240 field representatives
Concorde MSN 2 - 1970 based in over 110 cities
Concorde’s all metal frame made bonding easy
and needed no supplimentary Electrical Structure
Network (read article page 20). This still meant
an impresive amount of cables that needed to be
channeled throughout the aircraft.
Even with the advent of optic fibre cabling, each
successive Airbus programme uses more wiring
as new technology is developed.
Airbus’ largest aircraft the A380 uses an amazing
350 kilometres of cables.
WORLDWIDE TECHNICAL, MATERIAL & LOGISTICS TRAINING CENTRES
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 1980 Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Airbus Training Centre
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 1818 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 Toulouse, France
Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3333
USA/CANADA
airtac@airbus.com Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094
Tel: +1 703 834 3484
Spares AOG/Work Stoppage Airbus Maintenance
Fax: +1 703 834 3464
• Outside the Americas: Training Centre
CHINA Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001 Hamburg, Germany
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011 Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020
aog.spares@airbus.com Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8588
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162
• In the Americas:
Airbus Training Centre Americas
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Tel: +1 70 3729 9000
Miami, Florida - U.S.A.
ADMINISTRATION Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
Tel: +1 305 871 3655
aog.na@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 0413
Fax: +1 305 871 4649
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964
Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas:
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
ifd.spares@airbus.com
Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas:
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
hmv.spares@airbus.com
Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
Please contact your dedicated customer spares
account representative csr.na@airbus.com
With the A380, the sky is yours. The A380 is designed
to maximize airline revenues. By scheduling the A380
on constrained slots and high yield routes, airlines
will experience a signifi cant uplift of passengers to
really take advantage of high yield traffi c. That means
higher market share, maximized slot profi tability and
higher revenues.
Own the sky
ARTWORK 11217_AIR_OwnTheSky_Wispy 297x210_1.0 STUDIO:Airbus:2013:Airbus:10911853-2013:11217-AIR-Own_The_Sky_SinglePage_Masters:11217_AIR_OwnTheSky_Wispy2 97x210_1.0
John S
297 x 210 mm
PMS
3mm
Master PMS
PMS
8 November 2013 9:46 AM PMS
.skramedart
deretsiger
era
seman
tcudorp
eht
dna
ogol
sti
,subriA
