Advisory
US.D epartment Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
AC 120-40B
Date: 7/ 2Q/Ql
AIRPLANE SIMULATOR
QUALIFICATION
_--.-__
Initiated By: ASO-
. Advisory
Circular
-- - _._____-__-_ _____
AIRPLANE SIMULATOR Date: 7129191 ACNE. 1%4OB
QUALIFICATION
Initiated by: ASO- chge~
I PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC) provides an acceptable means, but not the
l
only means, of compliance with the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) regarding the
evaluationand qualification of airplane simulatorsused in training programs or airmen
checking under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). Criteria specified in this
AC are those used by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine.whether
a simulator is qualified and the qualification level. While these guidelines are not
mandatory, they are derived from extensive FAA and industry experience in determining
compliance with the pertinent FAR. Mandatory terms used in this AC such as "shall"
or "must" are used only in the sense of ensuring applicability of this particular
method of compliance when the acceptable method of compliance described herein is
used. Applicable regulations, must also be referenced to assure compliance with the
provisions therein. This AC does not change regulatory requirements or create
additional ones, and does not authorize changes in, or deviations from, regulatory
requirements. The provisions of the FAR are controlling. This document does not
interpret the regulations. Interpretations are issued only under established agency
procedures. This AC applies only to the evaluation of airplane simulators. See, for
example, AC 120-45, Advanced Training Devices (Airplane Only) Evaluation and
Qualification.
2 CANCELLATION. AC 120040A, Airplane Simulator and Visual System Evaluation, dated
J;ly 31, 1986, is canceled. Operators having simulator improvement or acquisition
projects in progress on the effective date df this advisory circular have 90 days from
the effective date to notify the National Simulator Program Manager (NSPM) of those
projects which the operator desires to complete under the provisions of AC 120-40A.
3 RELATEDF AR SECTIONS. FAR Part 1; FARSections 61.57, 61.58, and 61.157, FAR Part
.6i Appendix A; FAR Section 63.39, FAR Part 63 Appendix C; FAR Sections 121.407,
121.409, 121.439, and 121.441; FAR Part 121 Appendices E, F, and H; FAR Sections
125.285, 125.287, 125.291, and 125.297; and FAR Sections 135,293, 135.297, 135.323,
and 135.335.
.4 RELATED READING MATERIAL. AC 120028C, Criteria for Approval of Category III
Landing Weather Minima; AC 12049, Criteria for Approving Category I and Category II
Landing Minima for FAR 121 Operators; AC 120035B, Line Operational Simulations: Line-
Oriented Flight Training, Special Purpose Operational Training, Line Operational
Evaluation; AC' 120-41, Criteria for Operational Approval of Airborne Wind Shear
Alerting and Flight Guidance Systems; AC 120-45, Advanced Training Devices (Airplane
Only) Evaluation and Qualification; AC 120-46, Use of Advanced Training Devices
(AirplaneOnly); AC 150/5300-13,Airport Design; AC 150/5340-IF, Marking of Paved Areas
on Airports; AC 150/5340-4C, Installation Details for Runway Centerline Touchdown Zone
Lighting Systems; AC 150/5340-19, Taxiway Centerline Lighting System; AC 150/534b-24,
Runway and Taxiway Edge Lighting System; and AC 150/5345-28D, Precision Approach Path
Indicator (PAPI) Systems.
AC 120040B- 7729791
5 . BACKGROUND.
a. The availability of advanced technology has permitted greater use of
flight simulators for training and checking of flight crewmembers. The
complexity, costs, and operating environment of modern aircraft also has
encouraged broader use of advanced simulation. Simulators can provide more
indepth training than can be accomplished in airplanes and provide a very high
transfer of learning and behavior from the simulator to the airplane. The use
of simulators, in lieu of airplanes, results in safer flight training and cost
reductions for the operators. It also achieves fuel conservation and reduction
in adverse environmental effects.
b Astechnologyprogressed and the capabilities of flight simulation were
recognized, FAR revisions were made to permit the increased use of simulators
in approved training programs. Simulators have been used in training and some
checking programs since the middle 1950's. Various FAR amendments gradually
permitted additional simulator credits. The most significant recognition of
simulator capability has occurred since the early 1970's. In December 1973, FAR
Amendments 61-62 and 121-108 permitted additional use of visual simulators.
Amendments to FAR Section 121.439 permitted simulators approved for “the landing
maneuver” to be substituted for the airplane in a pilot recency of experience
qualification. These changes to the FAR constituted a significant step toward
the development of Amendments 61-69 and 121-161 issued June 24, 1980, which
contained the FAA Advanced Simulation Plan. To support this plan, the National
Simulator Evaluation Program was established by the FAA in October 1980. The
program is administered and directed by the NSPM.
c. The need for standard criteria was necessitated by the use of
simulators for training and checking. The evolution of the simulator technology
and the concomitant increased permitted use has required a similar evolution of
the criteria for simulator qualification. A listing of known simulator criteria
should, therefore, be informative. The qualification basis for a given simulator
may be any of the past criteria, depending on when the simulator was first
approved or last upgraded. The following list provides the effective dates of
simulator qualification criteria documents:
FAR Part 121, Appendix B l/9/65 to 2/2/70
AC 121-14 12/19/69 to 2/9/76
AC 121014A 2/9/76 to 10/16/78
AC 121014B 10/16/78 to 8/29/80
FAR Part 121, Appendix H 6/30/80 to Present
AC 121014C 8/29/80 to l/31/83
AC 120-40 l/31/83 to 7/31/86
AC 120-40A 7/31/86
Each of these documents has addressed the greater complexity represented by
succeeding generations of simulators. Complexity of the highest level is not,
however, required of all simulators. In fact, simulators are divided into levels
Par 5
7129191 - AC 120040B
that authorize additional training and checking with increased simulator
capability. Until the advent of the Advanced Simulation Plan, there were two
levels of simulators --nonvisual andvisual. Some visual simulators were approved
for “the landing maneuver ” The Advanced Simulation Plan introduced three
l
additional levels--Phase I, Phase II, and Phase III. Those visual simulators
previously approved for “the landing maneuver” were incorporated into Phase I.
The training and checking credits for nonvisual and visual simulators were
delineated in FAR Part 61, Appendix A, and FAR Part 121, Appendices E and F.
Credits for Phases I, II, and III were contained in the Advanced Simulation
Plan. Four levels of simulators were, therefore, addressed; Basic (nonvisual
and visual simulators), Phase I, Phase II, and Phase III. Each of the four
levels is progressively more complex than the preceding level and each contains
all the features of preceding levels plus the requirements for the designated
level. As the technology has advanced, so has the qualification guidance.
Efforts to keep the criteria updated are, therefore, ongoing with active
participation from both industry and government resources.
d Continuing this same process, the FAA, in coordination with industry,
has reiiewed a wide spectrum of devices used in training in order to provide
guidance on required standards and permitted uses. While recognizing the
requirement to categorize and define training devices, it became obvious that
the designation of simulators was outmoded. The concept of phases was no longer
applicable since it derived from an FAR provision which allowed operators to
upgrade their simulator inventories in phases while enjoying certain simulator
use privileges. The concept of upgrade in phases is essentially complete and
the designation of “phase” for identification of simulator complexitv is no
longer descriptive. Operators no longer begin at a lower level of qualification
and upgrade in phases. The tendency is to acquire a given level simulator that
best suits their position. Therefore, simulators were redesignated. The new
designations and their relationships with the simulator definitions used
previously and in FAR Part 121, Appendix H, are:
Level A - Visual
Level B - Phase I
Level C - Phase II
Level D - Phase III
Nonvisual simulators are now grouped with Level 6 training devices, but must meet
the requirements, except for visual, of a Level A simulator. There is no other
change in their characteristics or description; just their “name.” Alphabetic
designations were chosen for simulators to maintain a distinction from the
numerically designated training devices.
6 . DEFINITIONS.
a. Airplane Simulator is a full size replica of a specific type or make,
model, and series airplane cockpit, including the assemblage of equipment and
computer programs necessary to represent the airplane in ground and flight
operations, a visual system providing an out-of-the-cockpit view, and a force
Par 5
AC 120~40B-. 7129191
cueing system which provides cues at least equivalent to that of a three
degrees-of-freedommotion system; and is incompliance withtheminimum standards
for Level A simulator.
b Approval Test Guide (ATG) is a document designed to validate that the
performance and handling qualities of a simulator agree within prescribed limits
with those of the airplane and that all applicable regulatory requirements have
been met. The ATG includes both the airplane and simulator data used to support
the validation. The Master Approval Test Guide (MATG) is the FAA approved ATG
and incorporates the results of FAA witnessed tests. The MATG serves as the
reference for future evaluations.
c. Convertible Simulator is a simulator in which hardware and software
can be changed so that the simulator becomes a replica of a different model,
usually of the same type airplane. Thus, the same simulator platform, cockpit
shell, motion system, visual system, computers, and necessary peripheral
equipment can be used in more than one simulation.
s
d Highlight Brightness is the area of maximum displayed brightness which
satisfies the brightness test in appendix 1, item 4k.
e. Latency is the additional time beyond that of the basic airplane
perceivable response time due to the response time of the simulator. This
includes the update rate of the computer system combined with the respective time
delays of the motion system, visual system or instruments.
f NSPM is the FAA Manager responsible for the overall administration and
direction of the National Simulator Evaluation Program.
g* Operator, as used in this AC, identifies the person or organization
requesting FAA qualification of a simulator and is responsible for continuing
qualification and liaison with the FAA.
h . Simulation Data are the various types of data used by the simulator
manufacturer and the applicant to design, manufacture, and test the flight
simulator. Normally, the airplane manufacturer will supply airplane data to the
simulator manufacturer.
i. Simulator Evaluation Specialist is anFAA technical specialist trained
to evaluate simulators and to provide expertise on matters concerning airplane
simulation.
j. Snapshot is a presentation of one or more variables at a given instant
of time. A snapshot is appropriate for a steady state condition in which the
variables are constant with time.
k Statement of Compliance (SOC) is a certification from the operator that
specific requirements have been met. It must provide references to needed
sources of information for showing compliance, rationale to explain how the
4 Par 6
7/29/91 AC 120~40B
referenced material is used, mathematical equations and parameter values used,
and conclusions reached.
1 Time History is a presentation of the change of a variable with respect
to time. It is usually in the form of a continuous data plot over the time
period of interest or a printout of test parameter values recorded at multiple
constant time intervals over the time period of interest.
IL Transport Delay is the total simulator system processing time required
for an input signal from a pilot primary flight control until motion system,
visual system, or instrument response. It is the overall time delay incurred
from signal input until output response. It does not include the characteristic
delay of the airplane simulated. ’
n. Upgrade, for the purpose of this AC, means the improvement or
enhancement of a simulator for the purpose of achieving a higher level
qualification.
0. Validation Flight Test Data, for the purpose of this AC, are
performance, stability and control, and other necessary test parameters
electrically or electronically recorded in an airplane using a calibrated data
acquisition system of sufficient resolution and verified as accurate by the
company performing the test to establish a reference set of relevant parameters
to which like simulator parameters can be compared. Other data, such as
photographic data, maybe consideredacceptable flight test dataafter evaluation
by the NSPM.
P* Visual System Response Time is the interval from an abrupt control
input to the completion of the visual display scan of the first video field
containing the resulting different information.
7 . DISCUSSION.
a. The procedures and criteria for simulator evaluations under the
National Simulator Evaluation Program are contained in this AC. A simulator,
qualified by the NSPM in accordance with the guidance and standards herein, will
be recommended to the operator’s principal operations inspector (POI) or
certificate holding district office, as appropriate, for approval for use within
an operator’s training program.
b Evaluation of simulators used for training or certification of airmen
l
under Title 14 CFR fall under the direction of the National Simulator Evaluation
Program. A simulator will be evaluated under the provisions of this AC if it
is used in a training program approved under FAR Parts 63, 121, 125, or 135; or
if it is used by an operator in the course of conducting the Pilot-in-command
proficiency check required by FAR Section 61.58 or the issuance of an airline
transport pilot certificate or type rating in accordance with the provisions of
FAR Section 61.157.
Par 6 5
7724741
AC 12040B .
c. Under the National Simulator Evaluation Program concept, a simulator
is evaluated for a specific operator by an FAA Simulator Evaluation Specialist.
Based on a successful evaluation, the NSPM will certify that the simulator meets
the criteria of a specific level of qualification. Upon qualification by the
NSPM, approval for use of the simulator in a particular training program will
be determined by the PO1 in the case of FAR Parts 63, 121, 125, or 135
certificate holders or by the Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) responsible
for oversight of a training center when the training center is using the
simulator to conduct checks required by FAR Part 61.
d FAA evaluations of simulators located outside the United States will
be performed if such simulators are being used by a U.S. operator to train or
certificate U.S. airmen. Evaluations may be conducted otherwise as deemed
appropriate by the Administrator on a case-by-case basis.
e. Operators who contract to use simulators alreadyqualifiedand approved
at a particular level for an airplane type are not subject to the qualification
process. However, they are required to obtain FAA approval to use the simulator
in their approved training programs.
8 . EVALUATION POLICY.
a. The methods, procedures, and standards defined in this AC provide one
means 9 acceptable to the Administrator, to evaluate and qualify a simulator.
If an applicant desires to use another means, a proposal must be submitted to
the NSPM for review and approval prior to the submittal of a detailed ATG. If
an applicant chooses to utilize the approach described in this AC, the applicant
must adhere to all of the methods, procedures, and standards herein.
b The simulator must be assessed in those areas which are essential to
l
completing the airman training and checking process. This includes the
simulator’s longitudinal and lateral-directional responses; performance in
takeoff, climb, cruise, descent, approach, and landing; control checks; cockpit,
flight engineer, and instructor station functions checks; and certain additional
requirements depending upon the complexity or qualification level of the
simulator. The motion system and visual system will be evaluated to ensure their
proper operation.
c. The intent is to evaluate the simulator as objectively as possible.
Pilot acceptance, however, is also an important. consideration. Therefore, the
simulator will be subjected to validation tests listed in appendix 2 of this AC
and the functions and subjective tests from appendix 3. These tests include a
qualitative assessment of the simulator by an FAA pilot who is qualified in the
respective airplane. Validation tests are used to compare objectively simulator
and airplane data to assure that they agree within specified tolerances.
Functions tests provide a basis for evaluating simulator capability to perform
over a typical training period and to verify corr:ct operation of the simulator
\
controls, instruments, and systems.
Par 7
AC 120-40B
7/29/91
d Tolerances, listed for parameters inappendix 2, should not be confused
l
with design tolerances specified for simulator manufacture. Tolerances for the
parameters listed in appendix 2 are the maximum acceptable to the Administrator
for simulator validation.
e. A convertible simulator will be addreSsed as a separate simulator for
each model and series to which it will be converted and FAA qualification
sought. An FAA evaluation is required for each configuration. For example, if
an operator seeks qualification for two models of an airplane type using a
convertible simulator, two ATG’s or a supplemented ATG, and two evaluations are
required.
f For airplanes issued an original type certificate after June 1980 or
for significant amendments to an original type certificate, or for a supplemental
type certificate whichwould result in handling qualities or performance changes,
only manufacturer’s flight test data will be accepted for initial qualification.
Exceptions to this policy must be submitted to the NSPM for review and
consideration. It is the intent of the FAA that all tests listed in this AC be
applied to simulator qualification. However, for airplanes which were type
certificated, their flight tests completed and data released before the issuance
of this AC, the NSPM will consider the use of alternative data from the airplane
manufacturer. For older airplanes, particularly those certificated before June
1980, additional flight testing may be necessary. For a new type or model of
airplane, predicted data validated by flight test data, which has not received
final approval by the manufacturer, can be used for an interim period as
determined by the FAA. In the event that predicted data are used in programming
the simulator, it should be updated as soon as practicable when actual airplane
flight test data become available. Unless specific conditions warrant otherwise,
simulator programming should be updated within 6 months after release of the
final flight test data package by the airplane manufacturer.
g. If a problem with a validation test result is detected by the FAA
Simulator Evaluation Specialist, the test may be repeated. If it still does not
meet the test tolerance, the operator may demonstrate alternative test results
which relate to the test in question. In the event a validation test(s) does
not meet specified criteria, but the criteria is not considered critical to the
level of evaluation being conducted, the NSPM may conditionally qualify the
simulator at that level. The operator will be given a specified period of time
to correct the problem and submit the ATG changes to the NSPM for evaluation.
Alternatively, if it is determined that the results of a validation test would
have a detrimental effect on the level of qualification being sought or is a firm
regulatory requirement, the NSPM may qualify the simulator to a lesser level or
restrict maneuvers based upon the evaluation completed. For example, if a
Level D evaluation is requested and the simulator fails to meet landing test
tolerances, it could be qualified at Level A.
h Evaluation dates will not be established until the ATG has been
reviewdd by the NSPM and determined to be acceptable. Within 10 working days
of receiving an acceptable ATG, the NSPM will coordinate with the operator and
Par 8 7
AC 120040B - - 7129191
PO1 to set a mutually acceptable date for the evaluation. To avoid unnecessary
delays, operators are encouraged to work closely with the NSPM during the ATG
development process prior to making formal application.
i. At the discretion of the FAA Simulator Evaluation Specialist, the
operator’s pilots may assist in completing the functions and validation tests
during evaluations. However, only FAA personnel should manipulate the pilot
controls during the functions check portion of an FAA evaluation.
9 . INITIAL OR UPGRADE EVALUATIONS.
a. Anoperator seeking simulator initial or upgrade evaluationmust submit
a request in writing to the NSPM through the PO1 or responsible FAA FSDO. This
request should containa compliance statement certifying that the simulator meets
all of the provisions of this AC, that the cockpit configuration conforms to that
of the airplane, ‘that specific hardware and software configuration control
procedures have been established, and that the pilot(s) designated by the
operator confirm that it is representative of the airplane in all functions test
areas. A sample letter of request is included in appendix 4.
b . The operator should submit an ATG which includes:
(1) A title page with the operator and FAA approval signature blocks.
(2) A simulator information page, for each configuration in the case
of convertible simulators, providing:
(i) The operator’s simulator identification number or code.
(ii) Airplane model and series being simulated.
(iii) Aerodynamic data revision.
(iv) Engine model and its data revision.
(v) Flight control data revision.
(vi) Flight Management System identification and revision level.
(vii) Simulator model and manufacturer.
(viii) Date of simulator manufacture.
(ix) Simulator computer identification.
(x) Visual system model and manufacturer.
(xi) Motion system type and manufacturer.
(3) Table of contents.
(4) Log of revision and/or list of effective pages.
(5) Listing of all reference source data.
(6) Glossary of terms and symbols used.
Par 8
7129191 . AC 120-40B
(7) SOC with certain requirements. SOC’s must provide references to
sources of information for showing compliance, rationale to explain how the
referenced material is used, mathematical equations and parameter values used,
and conclusions reached. Refer to appendix 1, “Simulator Standards ,” comments
column, for SOC requirements.
(8) Recording procedures or required equipment for the validation
tests.
(9) The following for each validation test designated in appendix 2
of this AC:
(i) Name of the test.
(ii) Objective of the test.
(iii) Initial conditions.
(iv) Manual test procedures.
(v) Automatic test procedures (if applicable).
(vi) Method for evaluating simulator validation test results.
(vii) Tolerances for relevant parameters.
(viii) Source of Airplane Test Data (document and page number).
(ix) Copy of Airplane Test Data.
(x) Simulator Validation Test Results as obtained by the
operator.
(xi) A means, acceptable to the NSPM, of easily comparing the
simulator test results to airplane test data.
c. The operator’s simulator test results must be recorded on a
multichannel recorder, line printer, or other appropriate recording media
acceptable to the NSPM. Simulator results should be labeled using terminology
common to airplane parameters as opposed to computer software identifications.
These results should be easily compared with the supporting data by employing
cross-plotting, overlays, transparencies, or other acceptable means. Airplane
data documents included in an ATG may be photographically reduced only if such
reduction will not alter the graphic scaling or cause difficulties in scale
interpretationor resolution. Incremental scales ongraphical presentations must
provide the resolution necessary for evaluation of the parameters shown in
appendix 2. The test guide will provide the documented proof of compliance with
the simulator validation tests in appendix 2. In the case of a simulator
upgrade, an operator should run all validation tests for the requested
qualification level. Validation test results offered in a test guide for a
previous initial or upgrade evaluation should not be used to validate simulator
performance in a test guide offered for a current upgrade. For tests involving
time histories, flight test data sheets, or transparencies thereof, and simulator
test results should be clearly markedwith appropriate reference points to ensure
an accurate comparison between simulator and airplane with respect to time.
Operators using line printers to record time histories should clearly mark that
information taken from the line printer data output for cross-plotting on the
airplane data. The cross-plotting of the operator’s simulator data to airplane
Par 9
AC 120940B 7/29/91
data is essential to verify simulator performance in each test. During an
evaluation, the FAA will devote its time to detailed checking of selected tests
from the ATG. The FAA evaluation serves to validate the operator’s simulator
test results.
d The completed ATG and the operator’s compliance letter and request for
the evaluation will be submitted through the operator’s POI. The PO1 will then
submit the total package with a letter or memorandum of endorsement to the NSPM.
The ATG will be reviewed and determined to be acceptable prior to scheduling an
evaluation of the simulator.
e. A copy of an ATG for each type simulator by each simulator manufacturer
will be required for the NSPM’s file. The NSPM may elect not to retain copies
of the ATG for subsequent simulators of the same type by a particular
manufacturer, but will determine the need for copies on a case-by-case basis.
Data updates to an original ATG should be provided to the NSPM in order to keep
FAA file copies current.
f The operator may elect to accomplish the ATG validation tests while
the simulator is at the manufacturer’s facility. Tests at the manufacturer’s
facility should be accomplishedat the latest practical time prior to disassembly
and shipment. The operator must thenvalidate simulator performance at the final
location by repeating at least one-third of the validation tests in the ATG and
submitting those tests to the NSPM. After review of these tests, the FAA will
schedule an initial evaluation. The ATG must be clearly annotated to indicate
when and where each test was accomplished.
& In the event an operator moves a simulator to a new location and its
level of qualification is not changed, the following procedures shall apply:
(1) Advise the PO1 and NSPM of the move.
(2) Prior to returning the simulator to service at the new location,
the operator should perform a typical recurrent validation and functions test.
The results of such tests will be retained by the operator and be available for
inspection by the FAA at the next evaluation or as requested.
(3) The NSPM may schedule an evaluation prior to return to service.
h When there is a change of operator, the new operator must accomplish
all requiredadministrative procedures including the submission of the currently
approved Master Approval Test Guide (MATG) through the PO1 to the NSPM. The ATG
must be identified with the new operator by displaying the operator’s name or
logo. The PO1 will then submit the package as described in paragraph 8d above.
The simulator may, at the discretion of the NSPM, be subject to an evaluation
in accordance with the original qualification criteria. However, a simulator
having Phase I status resulting from a landing maneuver approval under AC 121014B
must meet the Phase I requirements in FAR Part 121, Appendix H, in the event of
the sale or transfer of the simulator from one operator to another.
IO Par 9
7/29/91 AC 120040B
i. The scheduling priority for initial and upgrade evaluations will be
based on the sequence in which acceptable ATG's and evaluation requests are
received by the NSPM.
j. The ATG will be approved after the completion of the initial or upgrade
evaluation and all discrepancies in the ATG have been corrected. This document,
after inclusion of the FAA witnessed test results, becomes the MATG. The MATG
will then remain in the custody of the operator for use in future recurrent
evaluations.
10 . RECURRENTE VALUATIONS.
a. For a simulator to retain its qualification, it will be evaluated on
a recurrent basis using the approved MATG. Unless otherwise determined by the
NSPM, recurring evaluations will be accomplished every 4 months by a Simulator
EvaluationSpecialist. Each recurrent evaluation, normally scheduled for 8 hours
of simulator time, will consist of functions tests and approximately one-third
of the validation tests in the MATG. The MATG is to be completed annually.
b Dates of recurrent evaluations will normally not be scheduled beyond
30 days of the date due. Exceptions to this policy will be considered by the
NSPM on a case-by-case basis to address extenuating circumstances.
c. In the interest of conserving simulator time, the following Optional
Test Program (OTP) is an alternative to the 8-hour recurrent evaluation
procedure:
(1) Operators 0 f simula tors having the app ropria teautomatic recording
and plotting capabilities may aPP ly for eval uation under the OTP.
(2) Operators must notify the NSPM in writing of their intent to enter
the OTP. If the FAA determines that the evaluation can be accommodated with
4 hours or less of simulator time, recurrent evaluations for that simulator will
be planned for 4 hours. If the 4-hour period is or will be exceeded and the
operator cannot extend the period, then the evaluation will be terminated and
must be completed within 30 days to maintain qualification status. The FAA will
then reassess the appropriateness of the OTP.
(3) Under the OTP, at least one-third of all the validation tests will
be performed and certified by operator personnel between FAA recurrent
evaluations. Complete coverage will be required through any three consecutive
recurrent evaluations. These tests and results will be reviewed by the FAA
Simulator Evaluation Specialist at the outset of each evaluation. The one-
third of validation tests executed for each recurrent evaluation should be
accomplishedwithin the 30 days prior to the scheduled evaluation or accomplished
on an evenly distributed basis during the 4-month period preceding the scheduled
evaluation. Twenty percent of those tests conducted by the operator for each
recurrent evaluation will then be selected and repeated by the Simulator
Evaluation Specialist along with 10 percent of those tests not performed by the
operator.
Par 9
11
AC 120040B 7129191
d . With appropriate arrangement and understanding between the operator
and FAA, an extended interval recurrent evaluation schedule based on semiannual
FAA inspections can be arranged. The extended interval evaluation schedule
relies on quarterly checks by the operator.
e. Prior to arrival for an on-site evaluation, the FAA inspector will
notify the operator if any tests are planned to be run that may require special
equipmentor technicians. These tests would includelatencies, control dynamics,
sounds and vibrations, or motion system tests.
f In instances where an operator plans to remove a simulator from active
status’for prolonged periods, the following procedures shall apply to requalify
the simulator pursuant to this AC:
(1) The NSPM and PO1 shall be advised in writing. The notice shall
contain an estimate of the period that the simulator will be inactive.
(2) Recurrent evaluations will not be scheduled during the inactive
period. The NSPM will remove the simulator from qualified status on a mutually
established date not later than the date on which the first missed recurrent
evaluation would have been scheduled.
(3) Before a simulator can be restored to FAA qualified status, it
will require an evaluation by the NSPM. The evaluation content and time required
for accomplishment will be based on the number of recurrent evaluations missed
during the inactive period. For example, if the simulator were out of service
for 1 year, it would be necessary to complete the entire test guide since under
the recurrent evaluation program, the MATG is to be completed annually.
(4) The operator will notify the NSPM of any changes to the original
scheduled time out of service.
(5) The simulator will normally be requalified using the FAA-approved
MATG and criteria that was in effect prior to its removal from
qualification; however, inactive periods exceeding 1 year will require a review
of the qualification basis and, if conditions warrant, may require the
establishment of a new qualification basis.
11 SPECIAL EVALUATIONS.
l
a. Between recurring evaluations, if deficiencies are discovered or it
becomes apparent that the simulator is not being maintained to initial
qualification standards, a special evaluation of the simulator may be conducted
by the NSPM to verify its status.
b . The simulator will lose its qualification when the NSPM can no longer
ascertain maintenance of the original simulator validation criteria based on a
recurrent or special evaluation. Additionally, the PO1 shall advise the operator
and the NSPM if a deficiency is jeopardizing training requirements, and
arrangements shall be made to resolve the deficiency in the must effective
manner) including the withdrawal of approval by the POI.
12 Par 10
7129191 AC IZO-40B
12 . MODIFICATION OF SIMULATORS, MOTION SYSTEMS, AND VISUAL SYSTEMS.
a. In accordance with FAR Part 121, Appendix H, operators must notify the
PO1 and NSPM at least 21 days prior to making software program or hardware
changes which might impact flight or ground dynamics of a simulator. A complete
list of these planned changes, including dynamics related to the motion and
visual systems and any necessary updates to the MATG, must be provided in
writing. Operators should maintain a configuration control system to ensure the
continued integrity of the simulator as qualified. The configuration control
system may be examined by the FAA on request.
b Modifications which impact flight or ground dynamics, systems
functions, and significant ATG revisions may require an FAA evaluation of the
simulator.
13 . SIMULATOR QUALIFICATION BASIS. The FAR require that simulators must
maintain their approved performance, functions, and other characteristics.
Except as provided in paragraph 2, all initial upgrade and recurrent evaluations
of those simulators initially qualified according to the acceptable methods of
compliance described herein will be conducted in accordance with the provisions
of this AC. Simulators approved prior to this AC will continue to maintain their
current qualification as long as they meet the standards under which they were
originally approved, regardless of operator, except as noted in paragraph 9h.
Any simulator upgraded to Level B, C, or D standards or any visual system or
motion system upgrade requires an initial evaluation of that simulator, visual
system, or motion system in accordance with the provisions herein.
William J. Whitq
Acting Director, Flight Standards Service
Par 12 13 (and 14)
APPENDIX 1. SIMULATOR STANDARDS
1 DISCUSSION. This appendix describes the minimum simulator requirements for qualifying Level A,
Live1 B, Level C, and Level D airplane simulators. An operator desiring evaluation of an airplane
simulator not equipped with a visual system (nonvisual simulator) must comply with Level A simulator
requirements except those pertaining to visual systems. Appropriate FAR as indicated in paragraph 3 of
this AC must be consulted when considering particular simulator requirements. The validation and
functions tests listed in appendices 2 and 3 must also be consulted when determining the requirements
of a specific level simulator. For Levels C and D qualification, certain simulator and visual system
requirements included in this appendix must be supported with a statement of compliance and, in some
designated cases, an objective test. Compliance statements will describe how the requirement is met,
such as gear modeling approach, coefficient of friction sources, etc. The test should show that the
requirement has been attained. In the following tabular listing of simulator standards, required
statements of compliance are indicated in the comment column.
SIMULATOR LEVEL
2. GENERAL A B C D
a. Cockpit, a full-scale replica of the X x X
airplane simulated. Direction of movement of
controls and switches identical to that in the
airplane. The cockpit, for simulator purposes,
consists of all that space forward of a cross-
section of the fuselage at the most extreme aft
setting of the pilots’ seats. Additional
required crewmember duty stations and those
required bulkheads aft of the pilot seats are
also considered part of the cockpit and must
replicate the airplane.
b . Circuit breakers that affect procedures X X X
and/or result in observable cockpit indications
properly located and functionally accurate.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C
c. Effect of aerodynamic changes for X X X
various combinations of drag and thrust normally
encountered in flight corresponding to actual
flight conditions, including the effect of change
in airplane attitude, thrust, drag, altitude,
temperature, gross weight, center of gravity
location, and configuration.
d Ground operations generically X
l
represented to the extent that allows turns
within the confines of the runway and adequate
control on the landing and roll-out from a
crosswind approach to a running landing.
e. All relevant instrument indications X X X Numerical values must be
involved in the simulation of the applicable presented in the
airplane automatically responded to control appropriate units for
movement by a crewmember or external disturbances U.S. operations, for
to the simulated airplane; i.e., turbulence example, fuel in pounds,
or windshear. speeds in knots, altitudes
in feet, etc.
f Communications and navigation equipment X X See appendix 3, par. 1, for
corresponding to that installed in the further information
applicant’s airplane with operation within the regarding long-range
tolerances prescribed for the applicable airborne navigation equipment.
equipment.
g* In addition to the flight crewmember X X
stations’, two suitable seats for the instructor/
check airman and FAA inspector. The NSPM will
consider options to this standard based on
,
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
s:
\o
A B C D )--r
.
unique cockpit configurations. These seats
must provide adequate vision to the pilot’s
panel and forward windows in visual system models.
Observer seatsneed not represent those found in
the airplane b&,must be equipped with similar
positive restraint devices.
h . Simulator systems must simulate the X
applicable airplane system operation, both on
the ground and in flight. Systems must be
operative to the extent that normal, abnormal,
and emergency operating procedures appropriate
to the simulator application can be accomplished.
i. Instructor controls to enable the X X X
operator to control all required system
variable&and insert abnormal or emergency
conditions into the airplane systems.
L Control forces and control travel X X X X
which correspond to that of the replicated
airplane. Control forces should react
in the same manner as in the airplane
under the same flight conditions.
k Significant cockpit sounds which X X X X
result’from pilot actions corresponding to
those of the airplane.
ST%
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS L
A B C D
1 Sound of precipitation, windshield X X Statement of Compliance.
l
wipers, and other significant airplane noises
perceptible to the pilot during normal operation
and the sound of a crash when the simulator is
landed in excess of landing gear limitations.
m. Realistic amplitude and frequency of X Tests required for noises
cockpit noises and sounds, including precipita- and sounds that originate
tion, windshield wipers, precipitation static, a from the airplane or
engine and airframe sounds. The sounds shall be airplane systems.
coordinated with the weather representations
required in FAR Part 121, Appendix H, Phase III
(Level D), Visual Requirement No. 3.
~-
n. Ground handling and aerodynamic X X X Statement of Compliance.
programming to include: Tests required.
(1) Ground effect--for example:
roundout, flare, and touchdown. This requires
data on lift, drag, pitching moment, trim, and
power in ground effect.
(2) Ground reaction--reaction of the
airplane upon contact with the runway during
landing to include strut deflections, tire
friction, side forces, and other appropriate
data, such as weight and speed, necessary to
identify the flight condition and configuration.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
A B C
(3) Ground handling characteristics-
steering inputs to include crosswind, braking,
thrust reversing, deceleration, and turning
radius.
0. Windshear models which provide training X X Tests required.
in the specific skills required for recognition
of windshear phenomena and execution of recovery
maneuvers. Such models must be representative
of measured .or accident derived winds, but may
include simplifications which ensure repeatable
encounters. For example, models may consist
of independent variable winds in multiple
simultaneous components. Wind models should
be available for the following critical phases
of flight:
(1) Prior to takeoff rotation.
(2) At liftoff.
(3) During initial climb.
(4) Short final approach.
The FAA Windshear Training Aid presents one
acceptable means of compliance with simulator
wind model requirements. The ATG should either
reference the FAA Windshear Training Aid or
present ariplane related data on alternate
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
methods implemented. .Wind models from the Royal
Aerospace Establishment (RAE), the Joint Airport
Weather Studies (JAWS) Project and other
recognized sources may be implemented, but
must be supported or properly referenced in the
ATG
l
P* Representative crosswinds and X X X X
instructor controls for wind speed and direction.
Q* Representative stopping and directional X X Statement of Compliance.
control forces for at least the following runway Objective tests required
conditions based on airplane related data. for (I), (2), (3),
Subjective check for
(1) Dry (4L 0, (6).
(2) Wet
(3) ICY
(4) Patchy Wet
(5) Patchy Icy
(6) Wet on Rubber Residue in Touchdown
Zone
r. Representative brake and tire failure X X Statement of Compliance.
dynamics (including antiskid) and decreased brake Tests required for de-
efficient due to brake temperatures based on creased braking efficiency
airplane related data. due to brake temperature.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
A B C D
s. A means for quickly and effectively X X Statement of Compliance.
testing simulator programming and hardware.
This may include an automated system which
could be used for conducting at least a portion
of the tests in the ATG.
t. Simulator computer capacity, accuracy, X X X X Statement of Compliance.
resolution, and dynamic response sufficient for FAR 121, Appendix H,
the qualification level sought. specifies computer
standard for Phases II
& III (Levels C and D).
u. Control feel dynamics which replicate X X
the airplane simulated. Free response of the Tests required. See
controls shall match that of the airplane appendix 2, par. 3.
within the tolerance given in appendix 2. Initial
and upgrade evaluation will include control free
response (column, wheel, and pedal)
measurements recorded at the controls. The
measured responses must correspond to those of
the airplane in takeoff, cruise, and landing
configurations.
(1) For airplanes with irreversible
control systems, measurements ma. y be obtained
on the ground if proper Pitot static inputs are
provided to represent conditions typical of
those encountered in flight. Engineering
validation or airplane manufacturer rationale
will be submitted as justification to ground
test or omit a configuration.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
A B C D
(2) For simulators requiring static
and dynamic tests at the controls, special test
fixtures will not be required during initial
evaluations if the operator’s ATG shows both
test fixture results and alternate test method
results, such as computer data plots, which were
obtained concurrently. Repeat of the alternate
method during the initial evaluation may then
satisfy this test requirement.
v. Relative responses of the motion system,
visual system, and cockpit instruments shall be Tests required.
coupled closely to provide integrated sensory
cues 6 These systems shall respond to abrupt X X For Levels A and B,
pitch, roll and yaw inputs at the pilot’s position response must be within
within MO/300 milliseconds of the time, but not 300 milliseconds.
before the time, when the airplane would respond
under the same conditions. Visual scene changes X X For Levels C and D,
from steady state disturbance shall occur within response must be within
the system dynamic response limit of 150 milliseconds.
150/300 milliseconds but not before the resultant
motion onset. The test to determine compliance
with these requirements should include
simultaneously recording the analog output from
the pilot’s control column, wheel, and pedals,
the output from an accelerometer attached to the
motion system platform located at an acceptable
location near the pilots’ seats, the output signal
to the pilots’ seats, the output signal to the
visual system display (including visual system
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
A B C D
analog delays), and the output signal to the
pilot’s attitude indicator or an equivalent test
approved by the Administrator. The test results
in a comparison of a recording of the simulator’s
response to actual airplane response data in the
takeoff, cruise, and landing configuration.
The intent is to verify that the simulator system
transport delays or time lags are less than
150/300 milliseconds and that the motion and
visual cues relate to actual airplane
responses. For airplane response, acceleration
in the appropriate rotational axis is preferred.
As an alternative, a transport delay test may
be used to demonstrate that the simulator system
does not exceed the specified limit of
150/300 milliseconds.
This test shall measure all the delay encountered
by a step signal migrating from the pilots’
control through the control loading electronics
and interfacing through all the simulation
software modules in the correct order, using a
handshaking protocol, finally through the normal
output interfaces to the motion system, to the
visual system and instrument displays. A
recordable start time for the test should be
provided by a pilot flight control input. The
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
A B C D
test mode shall permit normal computation time
to be consumed and shall not alter the flow of
information through the hardware/software system.
The transport delay of the system is then the
time between the control input and the individual
hardware responses. It need only be measured
once in each axis, being independent of flight
conditions.
w. Aerodynamic modeling which, for X Statement of Compliance.
airplanes issued an original type certificate Tests required. See
after June 1980, includes low-altitude level- appendix 2, par. 4, for
flight ground effect, Mach effect at high further information on
altitude, effects of airframe icing, normal and ground effect. Mach
reverse dynamic thrust effect on control surfaces, effect, aeroelastic
aeroelastic representations, and representations representations, and
of nonlinearities due to sideslip based on nonlinearities due to
airplane flight test data provided by the sideslip are normally
manufacturer. included in the simulator
aerodynamic model, but
the Statement of
Compliance must address
each of them. Separate
tests for thrust effects
and a Statement of
Compliance and demon-
stration of icing
effects are required.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
A B C D
X. Aerodynamic and ground reaction X X X Statement of Compliance.
modeling for the effects of reverse thrust on Tests required.
directional control.
Y* Self-testing for simulator hardware X Statement of Compliance.
and programming to determine compliance with Tests required.
simulator performance tests as prescribed in
appendix 2. Evidence of testing must include
simulator number, date, time, conditions,
tolerances, and appropriate dependent variables
portrayed in comparison to the airplane
standard. Automatic flagging of “out-of-
tolerance” situations is encouraged.
2. Diagnostic analysis printouts of X Statement of Compliance.
simulator malfunctions sufficient to determine
compliance with the Simulator Component
Inoperative Guide (SCIG). - These printouts shall
be retained by the operator between recurring
FAA simulator evaluations as part of the daily
discrepancy log required under FAR Section
121.407(a)(5).
aa. Timely permanent update of simulator X X X
hardware and programming subsequent to airplane
modification.
bb Daily preflight documentation either X X X
in the daily log or in a location easily
accessible for review.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C
3 . MOTION SYSTEM.
a. Motion (force) cues perceived by the X X X X
pilot representative of the airplane motions,
i.e. 9 touchdown cues, should be a function of the
simulated rate of descent.
b A motion system having a minimum of X X
three degrees of freedom.
A motion system which produces cues X X Statement of Compliance.
C.
at least equivalent to those of a six-degrees-of- Tests required.
freedom synergistic platform motion system.
d A means for recording the motion X X X X See 2.~. of this appendix.
response time for comparison with airplane data.
e. Special effects programming to include: X X X
(1) Runway rumble, oleo deflections,
effects of groundspeed and uneven runway
characteristics.
(2) Buffets on the ground due to
spoiler/speedbrake extension and thrust reversal.
(3) Bumps after lift-off of nose and
main gear.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
B C D
(4) Buffet during extension and
retraction of landing gear.
(5) Buffet in the air due to flap and
spoiler/speedbrake extension.
(6) Stall buffet to, but not
necessarily beyond, the FAA certificated stall
speed, Vs.
(7) Representative touchdown cues for
main and nose gear.
(8) Nosewheel scuffing.
(9) Thrust effect with brakes set.
f Characteristic buffet motions that result X Statement of Compliance.
from operation of the airplane (for example, Tests required.
high-speed buffet, extended landing gear,
flaps, nosewheel scuffing, stall) which can
be sensed at the flight deck. The simulator
must be programmed and instrumented in such a
manner that the characteristic buffet modes can
be measured and compared to airplane data.
Airplane data are also required to define
flight deck motions when the airplane is
subjected to atmospheric disturbances. General
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS
B C D
purpose disturbance models that approximate
demonstrable flight test data are acceptable.
Tests with recorded results which allow the
comparison of relative amplitudes versus
frequency are required.
1
4 . VISUAL -SYSTEMS.
a. Visual system capable of meeting all X X X X
the standards of this appendix and appendices
2 and 3 (Validation and Functions and Subjective
Tests Appendices) as applicable to the level
of qualification requested by the applicant.
I
b . Optical system capable of providing X X
at least a 45 degrees horizontal and 30 degrees
vertical field of view simultaneously for each
pilot.
c. Continuous minimum collimated visual X X Wide angle systems
field of view of 75 degrees horizontal and providing cross cockpit
30 degrees vertical per pilot seat. Both pilot viewing must provide a
seat visual systems shall be able to be operated minimum of 150 degrees
simultaneously. horizontal field of view;
75 degrees per pilot seat
operated simultaneously.
d b A means for recording the visual X X X X
response time for visual systems qualified under
AC 121~14C and subsequent.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS s:
u)
P
A B C D
e. Verification of visual ground segment X X X X
and visual scene content at a decision height on
landing approach. The ATG should contain
appropriate calculations and a drawing showing
the pertinent data used to establish the airplane
location and visual ground segment. Such data
should include, but is not limited to:
(1) Airport and runway used.
(2) Glide slope transmitter location
for the specified runway.
(3) Position of the glide slope
receiver antenna relative to the airplane
main landing wheels.
(4) Approach and runway light
intensity setting.
(5) Airplane pitch angle.
The above parameters should be presented for
the airplane in landing configuration and a
main wheel height of 100 feet (30 meters) above
the touchdown zone. The visual ground
segment and scene content should be determined
for a runway visual range of 1,200 feet or
350 meters.
f . For the NSPM to qualify precision X X X
weather minimum accuracy on simulators
qualified under previous advisory circulars,
operators must provide the information
required in e. above.
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
& Visual cues to assess sink rate and X X X
depth perception during takeoff and landing.
h Test procedures to quickly confirm X X Statement of Compliance.
visual’system color, RVR, focus, intensity, level Tests required.
horizon, and attitude as compared to the
simulator attitude indicator.
i. Dusk scene to enable identification of X X Statement of Compliance.
a visible horizon and typical terrain Tests required.
characteristics such as fields, roads, bodies
of water.
j. A minimum of ten levels of occulting. X X Statement of Compliance.
This capability must be demonstrated by a Tests required.
visual model through each channel.
k Daylight, dusk, and night visual scenes X Statement of Compliance.
w/sufficient scene content to recognize airport, Tests required.
the terrain, and major landmarks around the
airport and to successfully accomplish a visual
landing. The daylight visual scene must
be part of a total daylight cockpit environment
which at least represents the amount of light
in the cockpit on an overcast day. Daylight
visual system is defined as a visual system
capable of producing, as a minimum, full
color presentations, scene content comparable
in detail to that produced by 4,000 edges
F
-
3
*
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Co&d) SIMULATOR LEVEL COMMENTS s:
A B C
or 1,000 surfaces for daylight and 4,000
light points for night and dusk scenes, 6 foot-
lamberts of light measured at the pilot’s
eye position (highlight brightness), 3 arc-
minutes resolution for the field of view
at the pilot’s eye, and a display which is
free of apparent quantization and other
distracting visual effects while the simulator
is in motion. The simulator cockpit ambient
lighting shall be dynamically consistent with
the visual scene displayed. For daylight
scenes, such ambient lighting shall neither
“washout” the displayed visual scene nor fall
below 5 foot-lamberts of light as reflected from
an approach plate at knee height at the pilot’s
station and/or 2 foot-lamberts of light as
reflected from the pilot’s face. All brightness
and resolution requirements must be validated
by an objective test and will be retested at
least yearly by the NSPM. Testing may be
accomplished more frequently if there are
indications that the performance is degrading
on an accelerated basis. Compliance of the
brightness capability may be demonstrated with
a test pattern of white light using a spot
photometer.
(1) Contrast Ratio. A raster drawn
test pattern filling the entire visual scene
(three or more channels) shall consist of a
matrix of black and white squares no larger
SIMULATOR STANDARDS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
c
A B
than 10 degrees and no smaller than 5 degrees
per square with a white square in the center of
each channel.
Measurement shall be made on the center bright
square for each channel using a 1 degree spot
photometer. This value shall have a minimum
brightness of 2 foot-lamberts. Measure any
adjacent dark squares. The contrast ratio is
the bright square value divided by dark square
value
l
Minimum test contrast ratio result is 5:l.
Note: Cockpit ambient light levels should be
maintained at Level D (Phase III) requirements.
(2) Highlight Brightness Test.
Maintaining the full test pattern described
above, superimpose a highlight area completely
covering the center white square of each
channel and measure the brightness using the
3 degree spot photometer. Light points or light
point arrays are not acceptable. Use of
calligraphic capabilities to enhance raster
brightness is acceptable.
F
4
c‘ SIMULATOR STANDARDS fcont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C
(3) Resolution will be demonstrated
by a test pattern of objects shown to occupy
a visual angle of 3 arc-minutes in the visual
scene from the pilot’s eyepoint. This should
be confirmed by calculations in the statement
of compliance.
(4) Light point size - not greater than
6 arc-minutes measured in a test pattern
consisting of a single row of light; points
reduced in length until modulation is just
discernible, a row of 40 lights will form
a 4 degree angle or less.
(5) Light point contrast ratio - not
less than 25:l when a square of at least
1 degree filled (i.e., light point modulation is
just discernible) with light points is compared
to the adjacent background.
APPENDIX 2. SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS
1 DISCUSSION. Simulator performance and indicate in the ATG where flight test data are
system operation must be objectively evaluated by unavailable or unsuitable for a specific test,
comparing the results of tests conducted in the For such a test, alternative data should be
simulator to airplane data unless specifically submitted to the NSPM for approval. Submittals
noted otherwise. To facilitate the validation of for approval of data other than flight test must
the simulator, a multichannel recorder, line include an explanation of validity with respect
printer, or other appropriate recording device to available flight test information.
acceptable to the NSPM should be used to record
each validation test result. These recordings The Table of Validation Tests of this appendix
should then be compared to the airplane source generally indicates the test results required.
data. Unless noted otherwise, simulator tests should
represent airplane performance and handling
The ATG provided by the operator must describe qualities at operating weights and centers of
clearly and distinctly how the simulator will be gravity (CG) typical of normal operation. If a
set up and operated for each test. Use of a test is supported by airplane data at one extreme
driver program designed to automatically weight or CG, another test supported by airplane
accomplish the tests is encouraged for all data at midconditions or as close as possible to
simulators. Self testing of simulator hardware the other extreme should be included. Certain
and programming to determine compliance with all tests which are relevant only at one extreme CG
simulator requirements is specified by FAR or weight condition need not be repeated at the
Part 121, Appendix H, for Phase III (Level D) other extreme. Tests of handling qualities must
simulators. It is not the intent and it is not include validation of augmentation devices.
acceptable to the FAA to test each simulator
subsystem independently. Overall integrated Simulators for highly augmented airplanes will be
testing of the simulator must be accomplished to validated both in the unaugmented configuration
assure that the total simulator system meets the (or failure state with the maximum permitted
prescribed standards. A manual test procedure degradation in handling qualities) and the
with explicit and detailed steps for completion augmented configuration. Where various levels of
of each test must also be provided. handling qualities result from failure states,
validation of the effect of the failure is
The tests and tolerances contained in this necessary. Requirements for testing will be
appendix must be included in the operator’s ATG. mutually agreed to between the operator and the
Levels B, C, and D simulators must be compared to NSPM on a case-by-case basis.
flight test data except as otherwise specified.
For airplanes certificated prior to June 1980, an
operator may 9 after reasonable attempts have
failed to obtain suitable flight test data,
SIMULATORV ALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
In the case of simulators approved under previous a. Parameters, Tolerances, and Flight
advisory circular) the tolerances of this Conditions. The Table of Validation Tests of
appendix may be used in subsequent. recurrent this appendix describes the parameters,
evaluations for any given test providing the tolerances, and flight conditions for simulator
operator has submitted a proposed ATG revision to validation. When two tolerance values are given
the NSPM and has received FAA approval. for a parameter, the less restrictive may be used
unless otherwise indicated.
2 TEST REQUIREMENTS. The ground and flight
tests required for qualification are listed in If a flight condition or operating condition is
the Table of Validation Tests. Computer shown which does not apply to the qualification
generated simulator test results should be level sought, it should be disregarded.
provided for each test. The results should be Simulator results must be labeled using the
produced on a multichannel recorder, line tolerances and units given.
printer, or other appropriate recording device
acceptable to the NSPM. Time histories are b Flight Conditions Verification. When
required unless otherwise indicated in the Table comparing the parameters listed to those of the
of Validation Tests. airplane, sufficient data must also be provided
to verify the correct flight condition. For
Flight test data which exhibit rapid variations example, to show that control force is within +5
of the measured parameters may require pound (2.225 daN) in a static stability test,
engineering judgment when making assessments of data to show the correct airspeed, power, thrust
simulator validity. Such judgment must not be or torque, airplane configuration, altitude, and
limited to a single parameter. All relevant other appropriate datum identification parameters
parameters related to a given maneuver or flight should also be given. If comparing short period
condition must be provided to allow overall dynamics, normal acceleration may be used to
interpretation. When it is difficult or establish a match to the airplane, but airspeed,
impossible to match simulator to airplane data altitude, control input, airplane configuration,
throughout a time history, differences must be and other appropriate data must also be given.
justified by providing a comparison of other All airspeed values should be clearly annotated
related variables for the condition being as to indicated, calibrated, etc., and like
assessed. values used for comparison.
NOTE: The application of this appendix to
simulator validation requires reference to FAR
Part 121, Appendix H, to acquire full knowledge
of simulator criteria for approval.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS
I= Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
n,
Test Tolerance Flight Condition Requirement Comments
1. PERFORMANCE
a. TAXI
(1) Minimum Radius Turn +3 Feet (0,9m) or Ground/Takeoff
20% of Airplane
Turn Radius
I
(2) Rate of Turn vs. 210% or +2'/s*c. Ground/Takeoff IR
Nosewheel Steering Turn Rate
Angle
b. TAKEOFF Wnfactored aircraft certifi-
cation data may be used.
(1) Ground Acceleration 55% Time and Distance Ground/Takeoff IR IR Acceleration Time and Distance
Time and Distance or 25% Time and 2200 should be recorded for a
Feet (61 Meters) of minimum of 80% of total
Distance segment. (Brake release to
Vr)*
(2) Minimum Control Speed Maximum Airplane Ground/Takeoff IR Engine failure speed must be
Ground (Vmc ) Aero- Lateral Deviation within +l knot of airplane
dynamic Cont rols Only ~25% or 25 Feet engine failure speed.
per Applicable Air- (1.5 Meters)
worthiness Standard
or
Low Speed, Engine
Inoperative Ground
Control Characteristics
(3) Minimum Unstick Speed 23 K$s Airspeed Ground/Takeoff 3R V is defined as that speed
or equivalent as +1.5 Fitch a Fu which the last main
provided by the landing gear leaves the
airplane manufacturer ground. Main 1andWg Gear
Strut Compression or equiva-
lent air/ground signal should
be recorded. Record as a
minimum from 10 Kts before
start of rotation,
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test olerance Flight Condition rement
A
1. PERFORMANC(ET AKEOFFc onIt).
(4) Normal Takeoff +3 K$s Airspeed Ground/Takeoff t IR IR Record Takeoff prc Ifile from
21.5* Pitch and First Segment brake release to at least
21.5 Angle of Attack Climb 200 ft. (61 Meters) Above
220 Feet (6 Meters) Ground Level (AGL).
Altitude *Applies only to reversible
25.0 lb (2.224 dN) or 210% control systems.
Column Force*
I I I
(5) Critical Engine 23 K$s Airspeed Ground/Takeoff 'IR IR IR IR Record Takeoff profile at
Failure on Takeoff 21.5 o Pitch, and First Segment maximum takeoff weight to at
+1.5 Angle of Attack Climb least 200 ft. (61 Meters) AGL.
220 Feet (6 Meters) Engine failure speed must be
I
Altitude within +3 Kts of airplane
rf2 Bank and data. *Applies only to
Sideslip Angle reversible control systems.
~5.0 lb (2.224 dN) or +lOI
1
Column Force*
~5.0 lb (2.224 dN) or 210%
Rudder Pedal Force*
t3.0 lb (1.334 dN) or 105
Aileron Wheel Force*
1
(6) Crosswind Takeoff +3 K+ Airspeed Ground/Takeoff IR IR IR IR Record Takeoff profile to
~1.5~ Pitch, and First Segment I Ia t least 200 ft. (61 Meters)
21.5 Angle of Attack Climb AGL with same relative wind
220 Feet (6 Meters} t profile as airplane test.
Alsitude *Applies only to reversible
+2 Bank and control systems.
Sideslip Angle I
55.0 lb (2.224 dN) or 210%
Column Force*
1
+5.0 lb (2.224 dN) or 210%
Rudder Pedal Force*
23.0 lb (1,334 dN) or 10%
Aileron wheel Force*
1 I I
(7) Rejected Takeoff Overall Distance 2 ? Ground IR IR IR 'IR Auto brakes will be used
Braking Effort f. ? Iw here applicable, Maximum
(To Be Determined) braking effort, Auto or
Manual.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flight Condition Reauirement
A B C D
1. PERFORMANC(EC on71
c. CLIMB
(1) Normal Climb +3 Kts Airspeed Climb With All IR IR IR May be a Snapshot Test.
All Engines Operating &5% or +lOO FPM Engines Operating Manufacturer's gross climb
(0.5 Meters/See.) gradient may be used for
Climb Rate flight test data.
(2) One Engine Inoperative +3 Kts Airspeed Second Segment IR IR IR IR May be a Snapshot Test.
Second Segment Climb 25% or 2100 FPM Climb With One Manufacturer's gross climb
(0.5 Meters/Set.) Engine Inoperative gradient may be used for
Climb Rate, but not flight test data. Test at
less than the FAA weight altitude, temperature
Approved Flight Manual limited conditions.
Rate of Climb
(3) One Engine Inoperative +3 Kts Airspeed Approach Climb IR IR IR IR May be a Snapshot Test.
Approach Climb for 25% or 2100 FPM With One Engine Manufacturer% gross climb
Airplanes With Icing (0.5 Meters/Set.) Inoperative gradient may be used for
Accountability per Climb Rate, but not flight test data. Use near
Approved AFM less than the FAA maximum landing weight.
Approved Flight Manual
Rate of Climb
d. STOPPING
(1) Deceleration Time and 25% of Time. For Landing IR IR IR IR Time and Distance should
Distance, Wheel distance up to be recorded for at least
Brakes Using Manual 4000 Feet (1220 m.) 80% of the total segment
Braking, Dry Runway ~200 Feet (61 m.) (TD to Full Stop). Brake
(No Reverse Thrust) or 210% whichever is system pressure should be
smaller, For ‘distance available.
greater than 4000
Feet (1220 m.)
t5k of distance.
(2) Deceleration Time and 25% Time and the Landing IR IR IR IR Time and Distance should
Distance, Reverse Smaller of 210% or be recorded for at least
Thrust, Dry Runway 200 Feet (61 Meters) 80% of the total
(No Wheel Braking) of Distance demonstrated reverse thrust
segment.
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flight Condition Requirement
1, PERFORMANC(ES TOPPINGC onW
(3) Stopping Time and Representative Landing FAA approved Airplane Flight
Distance, Wheel Stopping Time and I Manual (AFM) data is
Brakes, Wet Runway Distance acceptable.
(No Reverse Thrust) I
(4) Stopping Time and Representative Landing I I FAA approved AFM data is
Distance, wheel Stopping Time and acceptable.
Brakes, Icy Runway Distance f
(No Reverse Thrust)
8. ENGINES
(1) Acceleration Ti ~10~ Approach or IR IR IR IR T- = Total time from initial
Tt 210% Landing tbottle movement until a
I
10% response of a critical
engine parameter.
T = Total time from T. to
98% go-around power. critical
engine parameter should be a
measurement of power (N , N2
EPR, Torque, etc.) Plo 4 fro&
flight idle to go-around
power for a rapid (slam)
throttle movement.
(2) Deceleration Ti 210% Ground/Takeoff Test from maximum takeoff power
Tt &lo% to 10% of maximUm takeoff power
(90% decay in power). Time
history should be provided.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TKSTS (Contld)
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Tgst Tolerance Flisht Condition Resuiremnt Comments
.
A B C D
2. HANDLING QWALITIES
a, STATIC CONTROLC HECKS**
(1) Column Position vs. +2 lbs (0.89 daN) Ground IR IR IR IR Uninterrupted control sweep,
Force and Surface fireakout 6tOp t0 Stop.
Position Calibration +5 Pbs (2.224 daN)
or+10% Force
+2 Elevator
(2) Wheel Position vs. +2 lbs (0.89 daN) Ground IR IR IR IR 'Uninterrupted control sweep,
Force and Surface breakout 6tOp t0 Stop.
Position Calibration k3 lbs (1.334 daN)
or&lo% Force
+10 Aileron
+3 Spoiler
(3) Pedal Position vs. +5 lbs (2.224 daN) Ground IR IR IR IR Uninterrupted control sweep,
Force and Surface Breakout stop to stop.
Position Calibration +5 lbs (2.224 daN)
or+10% Force
,Z Rudder
(4) Nosewheel Steering +z lbs (0.89 daN) Ground IR IR IR XR Uninterrupted control swe8p,
Force & Position Breakout 6tOp t0 Stop.
fr3 lbs (1.334 daN)
or_+10% Force
22 Nosewheel Angle
(5) Rudder Pedal Steering +2' Nosewheel Angle Ground IR IR IR IR
Calibration
I 1
**Column, wheel, and pedal position v6. force shall be measured at the control. An alternate method acceptable to the NSPMi n lieu of
the test fixture at the controls is to instrument the simulator in an equivalent manner to the flight test airplane. The force and
position data from this instrumentation can be directly recorded and matched to the airplane data. Such a permanent installation would
iFsi
eliminate the need for installation of external devices.
z
a;3
E 7
"Z
NW
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I = Initial Evaluation
Go
R = Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flisht Condition Reguirement Comments
4
I -I
A B c D
2. HANDLINGQ UALITIES (STATIC CONTROLC HECKSC onW .
(6) Pitch Trim Calibration +0.5' of Computer Ground and IR IR l[R IR Measure trim rate for go-
Indicator vs. Computed Trim Angle Go-Around around. Trim rate input and
210% Trim Rate surface rate time history is
appropriate.
(7) Alignment of Power +5* of Power Lever Ground IR IR LR IS imultaneous qecording for all
Lever Angle vs. Angle engines. A 5. tolerance
Selected Engine applies against airplane data
Parameter (EPR, N1, and between engines. May be
Torque, etc.) Snapshot Test.
(8) Brake Pedal Position k5 lb (2.224 daN) IR IR 1R IR Simulator computer output
Vs. Force or 10% results may be used to show
~10% or 150 psi (1033 kPa) compliance. Relate hydraulic
brake hydraulic system pressure to pedal
pressure position in a ground static
test.
b. DYNAMIC CONTROLC HECKS**
(1) Pitch Control +lOS of time for Takeoff, Cruise, IR IR Data should be normal control
first zero crossing, Landing displacement in both
and *lO(n+l)% of directions. Approximately 25%
period thereafter. to 50% of full throw.
jrlOS amplitude of
first overshoot. n is the sequential period of
220% of amplitude of . a full cycle of oscillation.
2nd and subsequent
OVerShOOts greater Refer to paragraph'3 this
than 5% of initial appendix.
displacement,
+l overshoot.
**Column, wheel, and pedal position vs. force or time shall be measured at the control. An alternate method acceptable to the NSPM in
lieu of the test fixture at the controls is to instrument the simulator in an equivalent manner to the flight test airplane. The force
and position data from this instrumentation can be directly recorded and matched to the airplane data. Such a pernanent installation
would eliminate the need for installation of external devices.
F
4
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I= Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flicrht Condition Requirement Comments
C D
2. HANDLINGQ UALITIES (DYNAMICC ONTROLC HECKS** ConW
(2) Roll Control Same as (1) above. Takeoff, Cruise, IR IR Data should be normal control
Landing displacement. Approximately
I I 25% to 50% of full throw.
~---~ ~~
(3) Yaw Control Same as (1) above. Takeoff, Cruise, IR IR Data should be normal control
Landing I displacement. Approximately
25% to 50% of full throw.
C, LONGITUDINAL I
(1) Power Change Dynamics +3 Kts Airspeed Approach to IR IR IR IR Wing flaps should remain in
5100 Feet (30 Meters) Go-Around the approach position, Time
Altitude history of uncontrolled free
220% or ~1.5' Pitch I response for time increment
1 from 5 seconds before
the initiation of the
configuration change to
15 seconds after completion
of the configuration change.
1
(2) Flap/Slat Change +3 Kts Airspeed Retraction, After 'IR IR IR IR Time history of uncontrolled
DyrraraiCS 2100 Feet (30 Meters) Takeoff. Extension, free response for time
Altitude Approach to Landing IR IR IR 'IR increment from 5 seconds
220% or 51.5' Pitch before the initiation of the
configuration change to 15
seconds after completion
of the configuration change.
(3) Spoiler/Speedbrake 23 Kts Airspeed Cruise and IR IR IR IR Time history of uncontrolled
Change Dynamics ~100 Feet (30 Meters) Approach free response for time
Altitude increment from 5 seconds
220% or 21.5' Pitch before the initiation of the
configuration change to
15 seconds after the
completion of the configu-
ration change.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont@d)
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
.ifi zati
Teat Tolerance Fliuht Condition iire lent
A B D
2. HANDLING QUALITIES (LONGITUDINAL Can't)
(4) Gear Change Dynamics +3 Kts Airspeed Takeoff to Second IR IR IR IR Time history of uncontrolled
+I00 Feet (30 Heters) Segment Climb, free respon663 for a time
Altitude Approach to Landing increment of 5 seconds before
220% or +1.5* Pitch the initiation of the
configuration change to 15
seconds after the completion
of the configuration change.
(5) Gear and Flap/Slat +l second or Takeoff, Approach IR IR IR IR Normal and alternate flaps,
Operating Times 10% of Time extension and retraction.
Normal gear, extension and
retraction. Alternate gear,
extension only.
(6) Longitudinal Trim +l" Pitch Control Cruise, Approach, 'IR IR IR 'IR May be Snapshot Tests.
(Stab and Elev) Landing
+l Pitch Angle
55% Net Thrust
or Equivalent
(7) Longitudinal Maneuvering +5 lbs (22.224 daN) Cruise, Approach, 'IR 'IR IR 'IR May be series of Snapshot
Stability (Stick or tlO% Column Landing Tests. Force or surface
Force/g) Force or Equivalent deflection must be in correcs
Surface dixection. oApproximately 20 ,
30 I and 45 banJc angle should
be presented
(8) Longitudinal Static +5 lbs (22.224 daN) Approach Data for at least 2 speeds
Stability or +lOt Column Force above and 2 speeds below trim
or Equivalent Surface speed. May be a series of
Snapshot Tests.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
x = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flight Condition Reauirement
2. HANDLING QUALITIES (LONGITUDINAL ConW
(9) Stick Shaker, Airframe +3 oKts Airspeed Second Segment Stall Warning Signal should
Buffet, Stall Speeds +2 Bank for speeds Climb and Approach be recorded and must occur
higher than stick or Landing in the proper relation to
shaker or initial stall.
buffet
(10) Phugoid Dynamics &lO% of Period Cruise Test should include 3 full
210% of Time to 112 cycles (6 overshoots after
or Double Amplitude input completed) or that
or fi.02 of Damping sufficient to determine time
Ratio to l/2 amplitude whichever
is less.
(11) Short Period Dynamics +1%5* Pitch or Cruise
+2 /sec. Pitch Rate
+.lOg Normal
e
Acceleration
d, IlATERAL DIRECTIONAL
(1) Minimum Control Speed, +3 Kts Airspeed Takeoff or Landing V may be defined by a
Air (Vm ), per (Whichever is most p:g f ormance or control limit
Applic ais e Airworthi- critical in which prevents demonstration
ness Standard airplane) Of VRca in the conventional
or manner.
Low Speed Engine
Inoperative Handling
Characteristics in Air
(2) Roll Response (Rate) 210% or +2*/set. Cruise and Approach Test with normal wheel
Roll Rate or Landing deflection (about 30%).
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
walification
Test Tolerance Flisht Condition Resuirentent Comments
'A B : c D
r
-i
(3) Roll Response to 210% or +2*/set. Approach or Landing 'IR IR 'IA IR Roll rate response.
Roll Controller Roll Rate
I
Step Input
(4) Spiral Stability Correct Trend, 22' Cruise 'IR IR IR IR ,Airplane data averaged from
Bank or 210% in multiple tests may be used.
20 Seconds Test for both directions.
(5) Engine Inoperative +l* Rgdder Angle Second Segment and IR IR IR IR May be Snapshot Tests.
Trim or +l Tab Angle Approach or Landing
oreEquivalent Pedal I
+2 Sideslip Angle
(6) Rudder Response +2*Jsec. or 210% Approach or Landing IR /I R IR IR ITest with stability augmen-
Yaw Rate tation ON and OFF, Rudder
step input of approximately
25% rudder pedal throw.
(7) Dutch Roll, Yaw 50.5 sec. or ,105 Cruise and IR IR IR Test for at least 6 cycles
Damper OFF of Period. Approach or Landing I with stability augmentation
+10% of Tine to OFF.
l/2 or Double
Amplitude or
2.02 of Damping Ratio.
520% or 21 88~. L
of Time Difference
Between Peaks of
Bank and Sideslip. I
(8) Steady State Sideslip For a given*rudder Approach or Landing IR IR IR IR May be a series of Snapshot
1
poqition ~2 Bank, Tests.
+l Sideslap, I
+lO% or +2. Aileron,
tlO# or +5 Spoiler
or Equivalent wheel
Position
WLE OF VALIDATION a (Cont'd)
I = Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Tolerance Recruirement
B
2, HANDLINGQ UALITIES (Con91
0. LANDINGS
(1) Normal Landing +3 K@ Airspeed Landing IR IR IR Test from a minimum of 200 ft.
+1.5o Pitch (61 Meters) AGL to Nosewheel
9.5 Angle of Attack Touchdown. Derotation may
klO% Altitude or be shown as a separate segment
+lO Feet (3 Meters) from the time of main gear
touchdown.
(2) Crosswind Landing +3 K$s Airspeed Landing IR IR IR Test from a minimm of 200 ft.
21.5, Pitch (61 Meters) AGL to Nosewheel
21.5 Angle of Attack Touchdown and rollout to
210% Altitude or 60 Kts, Use near maximm
+lQ Feet (3 Meters) landing weight with same
lf2* Bank Angle Relative Wind Profile as
+2 Sideslip Angle aircraft test,
or Yaw Angle
(3) One Engine Inoperative +3 Kss Airspeed Landing IR IR IR Test from a minimum of 200 ft.
Landing +1.50 Pitch (61 Meters) AGL to Nosewheel
21.5 Angle of Attack Touchdown.
210% Altitude or
218 Feet (3 Meters)
+2* Bank Angle
+2 Sideslip Angle
or Yaw Angle
(4) Directional Control +5 Kts Airspeed Landing IR IR IR Airplane test data required,
(Rudder Effectiveness) however, airplane manu-
With Reverse Thrust, facturer's engineering
Symmetric and Asymmetric simulator data may be used for
reference data as last resort.
Airplanes with demonstrated
minimum speed for rudder
effectiveness +5 Kts. Others,
test to verify simulator meets
conditions demonstrated by
airplane manufacturer.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I= Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flight Condition Requirement Comments
2. HANDLING QUALITIES Kon't)
f. GROUNDE FFECT
(1) A Test to Demonstrate +I0 Elevator or Landing See paragraph 4, this
Longitudinal Ground Stabilizer Angle appendix. A rationale must
Effect 25% Net Thrust or be provided with justification
Equivalent of results.
+l Angle of Attack
tlO% Height/Altitude
or +5 Feet (1.5 m.)
t3 Jnots Airspeed
+l Fitch Attitude
Appropriate test to
demonstrate Frequency
Response required.
b. Leg Balance As specified by IR IR IR IR Appropriate test to
operator for demonstrate Leg Balance
simulator acceptance. I I I I required.
c. Turn Around Check As specified by IR IR IR IR Appropriate test to
operator for demonstrate Smooth Turn
simulator acceptance. I I I I Around required.
d. Characteristic Buffet See Appendix 1, IXR Compliance statement required.
Hotions para 3.f. Test required.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I= Initial Evaluation
R= Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Tolerance Fliuht Condition Requirement
A B c D
4. VISdAL SYSTa - (Note: Refer to Appendix 3 for additional visual tests.)
.a. Visual Ground Segment 520% Landing. Static at IR IR IR IR The ATG should indicate the
(VW Threshold lights must 100 ft. (30 Meters) source of data, i.e., ILS
be visible if they wheel Height Above G/S antenna location, pilot
are in the visual Touchdown Zone eye reference point, cockpit
segment. on Glide Slope. cutoff angle, etc., used to
(See example in Runway Visual make visual ground segment
Comments.) Range = 1200 Ft. or scene content calculations.
350 Meters. Tolerance Example:
If the calculated VGS for the
airplane is 840 ft., the 20%
I I tolerance of 168 ft. may be
applied at the near or far
end of the simulator VGS
or may be split between both
as long as the total of
168 ft. is not exceeded.
b. Visual System Color Demonstration Model IR JR
I I
c. Visual RVR Calibration Demonstration Hodel IR IR
I I
d. Visual Display Focus Demonstration Model IR
and Intensity I I
8. Visual Attitude vs. Demonstration Model IR IR
Simulator Attitude
Indicator (Pitch and
Roll of Horizon) I
f. 'Demonstrate 10 Levels Demonstration Model IR IR May be requested for recurrent
of Occulting Through evaluation.
Each Channel of System I I
-
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I = Initial Evaluation
R = Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Tolerancg Flight Conditior) Reauirement
A B C D
5. SIMULATORS YSTEMS
a. VISUAL, MOTION, AND COCKPIT INSTRUMENTR ESPONSE
Visual, Motion, and 150 milliseconds or Takeoff, Cruise IR One test is required in each
Instrument Systems less after airplane Approach or Landing axis (pitch, roll, and yaw)
response to an abrupt response. for each of the 3 conditions
pilot controller input, compared to airplane data
compared to airplane 300 milliseconds or Takeoff, Cruise, IR IR for a similar input. (Total
response for a similar less after airplane Approach or Landing 9 tests.)
input. response. Visual change may start
before motion response, but
or motion acceleration must
occur before completion of
visual scan of first video
field containing different
information.
Transport Delay 150 Railliseconds or Pitch, Roll, Yaw IR IR One test is required in each
less after control axis. (Total 3 tests.)
movement.
300 milliseconds or Pitch, Roll, Yaw IR IR See Appendix 1, Item 2.~.
less after control
movement.
b. SOUND
Realistic araplitude and frequency of cockpit noises and sounds, IR Test results must show a
including precipitation static, and engine and airframe sounds. comparison of the amplitude
The sounds shall be coordinated with the weather representations and frequency content of
required in FAR Part 121, Appendix H, Phase III (Level D), Visual the sounds that originate from
Requirement No. 3. the airplane or airplane
systems.
TABLE OF VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
I= Initial Evaluation
R = Recurrent Evaluation
Qualification
Test Tolerance Flight Condition Requirement Comments
A B
c. DIAGNOSTIC TESTING
(1) A means for quickly and effectively testing simulator
programming and hardware. This could include an
automated system which could be used for conducting
at least a portion of the tests in the ATG.
(2) Self testing of simulator hardware and programming to
determine compliance with Levels B, C, and D Simulator
Requirements.
(3) Diagnostic analysis as prescribed in FAR Part 121,
Appendix H, Phase III (Level D) Simulator Requirement
No. 5.
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Cont’d)
3 CONTROL DYNAMICS. The characteristics of an measured at and recorded directly from the
airplane flight control system have a major cockpit controls. This procedure is usually
effect on the handling qualities. A significant accomplished by measuring the free response of
consideration in pilot acceptability of an the controls using a step or pulse input to
airplane is the “feel” provided through the excite the system. The procedure must be
cockpit controls. Considerable effort is accomplished in takeoff, cruise, and landing
expended on airplane feel system design in order flight conditions and configurations.
to deliver a system with which pilots will be
comfortable and consider the airplane desirable For airplanes with irreversible control systems9
to fly. In order for a simulator to be measurements may be obtained on the ground if
representative, it too must present the pilot proper Pitot-static inputs are provided to
with the proper feel; that of the respective represent airspeeds typical of those encountered
airplane. This fact is recognized in FAR in flight Likewise o it may be shown that for
Part 121, Appendix H, Phase II (Level C) some airplanes, takeoff, cruise, and landing
Simulator Requirement IO, which states: configurations have like effects. Thus, one may
“Aircraft control feel dynamics shall duplicate suffice for another, If either or both
the airplane simulated. This shall be determined considerations apply, engineering validation or
by comparing a recording of the control feel airplane manufacturer rationale must be submitted
dynamics of the simulator to airplane as justif ication for ground tests or for
measurements in the takeoff, cruise, and landing eliminating a configuration. For simulators
configuration.” requiring static and dynamic tests at the
controls, special test fixtures will not be
Recordings such as free response to an impulse or required during initial and upgrade evaluations
step function are classically used to estimate if the operator’s ATG shows both test fixture
the dynamic properties of electromechanical results and the results of an alternative
systems. In any case, it is only possible to approach, such as computer plots which were
estimate the dynamic properties as a result of. produced concurrently and show satisfactory
only being able to estimate true inputs and agreement. Repeat of the alternative method
responses. Therefore, it is imperative that the during the initial evaluation would then satisfy
best possible data be collected since close this test requirement.
matching of the simulator control loading system
to the airplane systems is essential. The a. Control Dynamics Evaluations. The
required control feel dynamic tests dictated by dynamic properties of control systems are often
FAR Part 121, Appendix H, are described in 2.b. stated in terms of frequency, damping, and a
of the Table of Validation Tests of this section. number of other classical measurements which can
be found in texts on control systems. In order to
W For initial and upgrade evaluations, it is establish a consistent means of validating test
required that control dynamic characteristics be results for simulator control loading, criteria
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Co&d)
are needed that will clearly define the overshoots becomes questionable. Only those
interpretation of the measurements and the overshoots larger than 5 percent of the total
initial displacement should be considered
tolerances to be applied. Criteria are needed
significant. The residual band, labelled T(A ) on
for both the underdamped system and the
Figure 1 is +5 percent of the initial disp Pa ce-
overdamped system, including the critically ment amplitude A, from the steady state value of
damped case In case of an underdamped system the oscillation. Oscillations within the
l
with very light damping, the system may be residual band are considered insignificant. When
quantified in terms of frequency and damping. In comparing simulator data to airplane data, the
critically damped or overdamped systems, the process should begin by overlaying or aligning
frequency and damping is not readily measured the simulator and airplane steady state values
and then comparing amplitudes of oscillation
from a response time history. Therefore, some
peaks, the time of the first zero crossing, and
other measurement must be used.
individual periods of oscillation. The simulator
should show the same number of significant
b For Levels C and D Simulators. Tests to overshoots to within one when compared against
verify that control feel dynamics represent the the airplane data. This procedure for evaluating
airplane must show that the dynamic damping the response is illustrated in Figure 1.
cycles (free response of the control) match that
(2) Critically Damped and Overdamped
of the airplane within specified tolerances. The
Response. Due to the nature of critically damped
method of evaluating the response and the
responses (no overshoots), the time to reach
tolerance to be applied are described below for
90 percent of the steady state (neutral point)
the underdamped and critically damped cases. value should be the same as the airplane within
+I 0 percent. The simulator response should be
(1) Underdamped Response. Two measure- critically damped also. Figure 2 illustrates the
ments are required for the period, the time to procedure.
first zero crossing (in case a rate limit is
Tolerances
present) and the subsequent frequency of
oscillation. It is necessary to measure cycles
The following table summarizes the tolerances, T.
on an individual basis in case there are See Figures 1 and 2 for an illustration of the
nonuniform periods in the response, Each period referenced measurements.
will be independently compared to the respective
period of the airplane control system and, T&J. 910% of P,
consequently, will enjoy the full tolerance T(P,) +20!% of P,
specified for that period. T(P,) +30% of P
T(P,) 710(n+l)%*of P
T(A,) 910% of A,, +28% of Subsequent Peaks
The damping tolerance should be applied to T&j) 75% of A = Residual Band
overshoots on an individual basis. Care should &ershoo& -+ I
be taken when applying the tolerance to small
overshoots since the significance of such
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Cont’d)
c. Alternative Method for Control Dynamics. Tolerances
One airplane manufacturer has proposed, and the
FAA accepts, an alternative means for dealing (1) Static Test - Items 2.a. (l)(2) and
with control dynamics. The method applies to (3) of this appendix.
airplanes with hydraulically powered flight (2) Dynamic Test - 2 lb. or 10 percent on
controls and artificial feel systems. Instead of dynamic increment above static test.
free response measurements, the system would be
validated by measurements of control force and The FAA is open to alternative means such as the
rate of movement. one described above. Such alternatives must,
however, be justified and appropriate to the
For each axis of pitch, roll, and yaw, the application. For example, the method described
control shall be forced to its maximum extreme here may not apply to all manufacturers’ systems
position for the following distinct rates. These and certainly not to airplanes with reversible
tests shall be conducted at typical taxi 9 control systems. Hence, each case must be
takeoff, cruise, and landing conditions. considered on its own merit on an ad hoc basis.
Should the FAA find that alternative methods do
(1) Static Test - Slowly move the control not result in satisfactory simulator performance,
such that approximately 100 seconds are required then more conventionally accepted methods must be
to achieve a full sweep. A full sweep is defined used +
as movement of the controller from neutral to the
stop, usually aft or right stop, then to the 4 . GROUND EFFECT. During landing and takeoff,
opposite stop, then to the neutral position. airplanes operate for brief time intervals close
to the ground. The presence of the ground
(2) Slow Dynamic Test - Achieve a full significantly modifies the air flow past the
sweep in approximately 10 seconds. airplane and, there fore 9 cha .nges the aerodynamic
characteristics. The clos e proxim ity of the
(3) Fast Dynamic Test - Achieve a full ground imposes a barrier which inhibits the
sweep in approximately 4 seconds. downward flow normally associated with the
production of lift. The downwash is a function
NOTE : Dynamic sweeps may be limited to forces of height with the effects usually considered to
not exceeding 100 lb. be negligible.above a height of approximately one
wingspan. There are three main effects of the
reduced downwash:
a. A reduction in downwash angle at the tail
for a conventional configuration.
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Cont’d)
b An increase in both wing and tail lift e. Airspeed.
because of changes in the relationship of lift
coefficient to angle of attack (increase in lift This listing of parameters assumes that ground
curve slope). effect data is acquired by tests during “fly-
bYS ” at several altitudes in and out of ground
c. A reduction in the induced drag. effect. The test altitudes should, as a minimum,
be at 10 percent, 30 percent, and 70 percent of
Relative to out-of-ground effect flight (at a the airplane wingspan and one altitude out of
given angle of attack), these effects result in ground effect; e.g., 150 percent of wingspan.
higher lift in ground effect and less power Level fly-bys are required for Level D, but not
required for level flight. Because of the for Level C and Level B. They are, however,
associated effects on stability, they also cause acceptable for all levels.
significant changes in elevator (or stabilizer)
angle to trim and stick (column) forces required If, in lieu of the level fly-by method for Levels
to maintain a given lift coefficient in level B and C, other methods such as shallow glidepath
flight near the ground. approaches to the ground maintaining a chosen
parameter constant are proposed, then additional
For a simulator to be used for takeoff and in validation parameters are important. For
particularly landing credit, it must faithfully example, if constant attitude shallow approaches
reproduce the aerodynamic changes which occur in are chosen as the test maneuver, pitch attitude,
ground effect. The parameters chosen for and flight path angle are additional necessary
simulator validation must obviously be indicative validation parameters. The selection of the test
of these changes The primary validation methods and procedures to validate ground effect
l
parameters for longitudinal characteristics in is at the option of the organization performing
ground effect are: the flight tests; however, rationale -must be
provided to conclude that the tests performed do
a. Elevator or stabilizer angle to trim. indeed validate the ground effect model.
b Power (thrust) required for level flight The allowable longitudinal parameter tolerances
(PLF)’ for validation of ground effect characteristics
l
are:
c. Angle of attack for a given lift
coefficient. Elevator or Stabilator Angle 21"
d 0 Height/altitude. Power for Level Flight (PLF)+5-%
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Cont’d)
Angle of Attack +1*
Altitude/Height +lO%
or 25' (1.5 m.)
Airspeed +3 Knots
Pitch Attitude 21'
The lateral-directional characteristics are also
altered by ground effect. Because of the above-
mentioned changes in lift curve slope, roll
damping 9 as an example, is affected. The change
in roll damping will affect other dynamic modes
usually evaluated for simulator validation. In
fact, Dutch-roll dynamics, spiral stability, and
roll-rate for a given lateral control input are
altered by ground effect. Steady heading
sideslips will also be affected. These effects
must be accounted for in the simulator modeling.
Several tests such as “crosswind landing,” “one
engine inoperative landing,’ and ‘engine failure
on takeoff” serve to validate lateral-
directional ground effect since portions of them
are accomplished while transiting altitudes at
which ground effect is an important factor.
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
P=Period
A=Amplitude
T(P)=Tolerance applied
.
to Period
T(A)=Tolerance applied
to Amplitude
Displacement
vs
Time
Figure 1. Under-damped Step Response
SIMULATOR VALIDATION TESTS (Cont'd)
r-
O.lA&.
I
I- Pg 4
Displacement
vs
Time
Figure 2. Critically-damped Step Response
7/29/91 AC 120-40B
Appendix 3
APPENDIX 3. FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS
1 DISCUSSION. Accurate replication of airplane systems functions will be
l
checked at each flight crewmember position by an FAA Simulator Evaluation
Specialist. This includes procedures using the operator’s approved manuals and
checklists. Handling qualities, performance, and simulator systems operation
will be subjectively assessed by an FAASimulator EvaluationSpecialist qualified
in the respective airplane.
At the request of a POI, the Simulator Evaluation Specialist may assess the
simulator for a special aspect of an operator’s training program during the
functions and subjective portion of a recurrent evaluation. Such an assessment
may include a portion of a LOFT scenario or special emphasis items in the
operator’s training program. Unless directly related to a requirement for the
current qualification level, the results of such an evaluation would not affect
the simulator’s current status.
Operational principal navigation systems including inertial navigation systems,
OMEGA, or other long-range systems, and the associated electronic display systems
will be evaluated if installed. The Simulator Evaluation Specialist will include
in his report to the PO1 the effect of the system operation and system
limitations.
2 TEST REQUIREMENTS. The ground and flight tests and other checks required
f;r qualification are listed in the Table of Functions and Subjective Tests.
The table includes maneuvers and procedures to assure that the simulator
functions and performs appropriately for use in pilot training and checking in
the maneuvers and procedures delineated in FAR Part 61 and FAR Part 121,
Appendices E and F. It also contains tests to assure compliance with FAR
Part 121, Appendix H, and other regulatory provisions. Maneuvers and procedures
are included to address some features of advanced technology airplanes and
innovative training programs. For example, “high angle of attack maneuvering”
is included to provide an alternative to “approach to stalls.” Su_c h an
alternative is necessary for airplanes employing flight envelope limiting
technology. The portion of the table addressing pilot functions and maneuvers
is divided by flight phases. Visual systems testsare listed separately as are
special effects.
All systems functions will be assessed for normal and, where appropriate,
alternate operations. Normal, abnormal, and emergency procedures associated with
a flight phase will be assessed during the evaluation of maneuvers or events
within that flight phase. Systems are listed separately under “Any Flight Phase”
to assure appropriate attention to systems checks.
Par 1
0
.
0
c
iz
z
*r
:
*r
$
J--k
.
0 t-c 5 :2 .
X
x
x
x
X
X
x
x
X
--.
-
-
-_-
_
_
~_
~-~
_
-
~
-
X
X
x
x
X
x
X
x
x
X
7/29/91- AC 120040B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATORL EVEL
A B D
(i) Engine parameter relationships.
(ii) Acceleration characteristics.
(iii) Nosewheel and rudder steering.
(iv) Crosswind (maximum demonstrated).
(v) Special performance.
(vi) Instrument takeoff.
(vii) Landing gear, wing flap, leading
edge device operation.
(viii) Other.
(2) Abnormal/Emergency.
(i) Rejected.
(ii) Rejected special performance.
(iii) With failure of most critical
engine at most critical point along takeoff path
(continued takeoff).
(iv) With windshear.
(v) Flight control system failure
modes.
(vi) Other.
d . INFLIGHT OPERATION
(1) Climb.
(i) Normal.
(ii) One engine inoperative.
(iii) Other.
Par 1 3
7/29/91
AC 120040B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
(2) Cruise. X X X X
(i) Performance characteristics (speed
vs. power).
(ii) Turns with/without spoilers (speed
brake) deployed.
(iii) High altitude handling.
(iv) High speed handling.
(v) Mach tuck and trim, overspeed
warning.
(vi) Normal and steep turns.
(vii) Performance turns.
(viii) Approach to stalls (stall warning,
buffet, and g-break) cruise, takeoff, approach, and
landing configuration.
(ix) High angle of attack maneuvers
( cruise, takeoff, approach, and landing).
(x) Inflight engine shutdown and
restart.
(xi) Maneuvering with one engine
inoperative.
(xii) Specific flight characteristics.
(xiii) Manual flight control reversion.
(xiv) Flight control system failure
modes.
(xv) Other.
(3) Descent. X X X X
(i) Normal.
Par 1
AC 120-40B
7/29/91 _
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B D
(ii) Maximum rate.
(iii) Manual flight control reversion.
(iv) Flight control system failure
modes.
(v) - Other.
e. APPROACHES
(1) Nonprecision.
(i) Approach procedure(s), one or
more of the following.
-- NDB
-- VOR, RNAV, TACAN
-- DME ARC
-- LOC/BC
-- AZI, LDA, LOC, SDF
-- ASR
(ii) Missed approach.
(iii) All engines operating.
(iv) One or more engines inoperative.
(2) Precision.
(i) PAR.
(ii) ILS.
(A) Normal.
(B) Engine(s) inoperative.
(C) Category I published approach.
1 Manually controlled with
and without flight director to 100 ft. (30 m.) below
CAT I minima.
Par 1
7/29/91
AC IZO-40B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATORL EVEL
2 With crosswind (maximum
demonstrated).
3 With windshear.
(D) Category II published approach.
1 Autocoupled, auto-
throttle, autoland. -
2 All engines operating
missed approach.
(E) Category III published
approach.
1 With generator failure.
2 With 10 knot tailwind.
3 With 10 knot crosswind.
5 One engine inoperative.
(iii) Missed approach.
(A) All engines operating.
(B) One or more engines inoperative,
(3) Visual. X X
(i) Abnormal wing flaps/slats.
(ii) Without glide slope guidance.
f . VISUAL SEGMENTA ND LANDING
(1) Normal.
(i) Crosswind (maximum demonstrated). X
(ii) From VFR traffic pattern.
Par 1
6
7129191 AC 120040B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B
(iii) From nonprecision approach.
(iv) From precision approach.
(v) From circling approach.
NOTE : Simulators with visual systems which permit
completing a circling approach without violating
FAR Section 91.175(e) may be approved for that
particular circling approach procedure.
(2) Abnormal/emergency.
(i) Engine(s) inoperative.
(ii) Rejected.
(iii) With windshear.
(iv) With standby (minimum electrical/
hydraulic) power.
(v) With longitudinal trim malfunction.
(vi) With lateral-directional trim
malfunction.
(vii) With loss of flight control
power (manual reversion).
(viii) With worst case failure of flight
control system (most significant degradation of
fly-by-wire system which is not extremely improbable).
(ix) Other flight control system
failure modes as dictated by training program.
(x) Other.
go SURFACE OPERATIONS (POST LANDING1
(1) Landing roll and taxi.
(i) Spoiler operation.
Par I
AC 120-40B- 7129191
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONSA ND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
(ii) Reverse thrust operation.
(iii) Directional control and ground
handling, both with and without reverse thrust.
(iv) Reduction of rudder effectiveness
with increased reverse thrust (rear pod-mounted
engines).
(v) Brake and anti-skid operation
with dry, wet, and icy conditions.
(vi) Brake operation.
(vii) Other.
h . ANY FLIGHT PHASE
(1) Airplane and powerplant systems
operation. X X X X
(i) Air conditioning.
(ii) Antiicing/deicing.
(iii) Auxiliary powerplant.
(iv) Communications.
(v) Electrical.
(vi) Fire detection and suppression.
(vii) Flaps/slats/speed brakes
(viii) Flight controls.
(ix) Fuel and oil.
(x) Hydraulic.
(xi) Landing gear.
(xii) Oxygen.
Par 1
T/29/91 . AC 1Z O-40B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
(xiii) Pneumatic.
(xiv) Powerplant.
(xv) Pressurization.
(2) Flight management and guidance systems. X X X X
(i) Airborne radar.
(ii) Automatic landing aids.
(iii) Autopilot.
(iv) Collision avoidance system.
(v) Flight control computers.
(vi) Flight data displays.
(vii) Flight management computers.
(viii) Head-up displays.
(ix) Navigation systems.
(x) Stall warning/avoidance.
(xi) Stability and control augmentation.
(xii) Windshear avoidance equipment.
(3) Airborne procedures. X X
(i) Holding.
(ii) Air hazard avoidance.
(iii) Windshear.
(4) Engine shutdown and parking. X X
(i) Engine and systems operation.
(ii) Parking brake operation.
Par 1
7129191
AC IZO-40B
Appendix 3
TASLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATORL EVEL
B
(5) Other.
2 VISUAL SYSTEM
l
a. Accurate portrayal of environment relating
to simulator attitudes.
b The distances at which runway features
are viiible should not be less than those listed
below. Distances are measured from runway threshold
to an airplane aligned with the runway on an
extended 3 degree glide slope.
(1) Runway definition, strobe lights,
approach lights, runway edge white lights and VAST
lights from 5 statute miles (8 kilometers) of.the
runway threshold.
(2) Runway centerline lights and taxiway
definition from 3 statute miles (4.8 kilometers).
(3) Threshold lights and touchdown zone
lights from 2 statute miles (3.2 kilometers).
(4) Runway markings within range of
landing lights for night scenes; as required by 3 arc-
minutes resolution on day scenes.
c. Representative airport scene content
including:
(1) Airport runways and taxiways.
(2) Runway definition.
(i) Runway surface and markings.
10 Par I
7129191 AC IZO-40B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont'd) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
(ii) Lighting for the runway in use
including runway edge and centerline lighting,
touchdown zone, VASI, and approach lighting of
appropriate colors.
(iii) Taxiway lights.
d . Operational landing lights. X X X X
e. Instructor controls of: X X X X
(1) Cloudbase.
(2) Visibility in statute miles (km) and
RVR in feet (meters).
(3) Airport selection.
(4) Airport lighting.
f Visual system compatibility with aero-
dynamic programming. X X X X
Visual cues to assess sink rates and depth
&
perception during landings. X X X
(1) Surface on taxiways and ramps.
(2) Terrain features.
h . Dusk and night visual scene capability. X X
i. Minimum of three specific airport scenes. X X
(1) Surfaces on runways, taxiways, and
ramps.
(2) Lighting of appropriate color for all
runways including runway edge, centerline, VASI, and
approach lighting for the runway in use.
(3) Airport taxiway lighting.
(4) Ramps and terminal buildings which
correspond to an operator's Line-Oriented Flight
Training and Line Oriented Simulator scenarios.
Par 2 11
AC 120-408 7129191
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B D
j. General terrain characteristics and
significant landmarks.
k At and below an altitude of 2,000 feet
(610 m:) height above the airport and within a radius
of 10 miles (16 kilometers) from the airport,
weather representations, including the following:
(1) Variable cloud density.
(2) Partial obscuration of ground scenes;
the effect of a scattered to broken cloud deck.
(3) Gradual break out.
(4) Patchy fog.
(5) The effect of fog on airport lighting.
1 A capability to present ground and air
hazards such as another airplane crossing the active
runway or converging airborne traffic.
m. Operational visual scenes which portray
representative physical relationships known to
cause landing illusions such as short runways,
landing approaches over water, uphill or downhill
runways, rising terrain on the approach path, and
unique topographic features.
n. Special weather representations of light,
medium, and heavy precipitation near a thunderstorm
on takeoff, approach, and landings at and below an
altitude of 2,000 feet (610 m.) above the airport
surface and within a radius of 10 miles (16 kilometers)
from the airport.
0. Wet and snow-covered runways including
runway lighting reflections for wet, partially
obscured lights for snow, or suitable alternative
effects.
P* Realistic color and directionality of
airport lighting.
12 Par 2
7129191 AC IZO-40B
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Cont’d) SIMULATOR LEVEL
A B C D
Q* Weather radar presentations in airplanes
where radar information is presented on the pilot’s X
navigation instruments. Radar returns should
correlate to the visual scene.
r. Freedom from apparent quantization (aliasing). X
3 SPECIAL EFFECTS
l
a. Runway rumble, oleo deflections, effects of
groundspeed and uneven runway characteristics. X
b Buffets on the ground due to spoiler/
speedbrake extension and thrust reversal. X
c. Bumps after lift-off of nose and main gear. X
d Buffet during extension and retraction of
landing gear. X
e. Buffet in the air due to flap and spoiler/
speedbrake extension and approach-to-stall buffet. X
f Touchdown cues for main and nose gear. X
l
g* Nosewheel scuffing. X
h Thrust effect with brakes set. X
l
i. Representative brake and tire failure
dynamics (including antiskid) and decreased brake
efficiency due to high brake temperatures based on
airplane related data. These representations should X X
be realistic enough to cause pilot identification of
the problem and implementation of appropriate
procedures. Simulator pitch, side loading, and
directional control characteristics should be
representative of the airplane.
j. Sound of precipitation and significant
airplane noises perceptible to the pilot during
normal operations and the sound of a crash when the X X
simulator is landed in excess of landing gear
limitations. Significant airplane noises should
include noises such as engine, flap, gear, and
spoiler extension and retraction and thrust
reversal to a comparable level as that found in the
Par 2
AC 120-40B 7/29/ 91
Appendix 3
TABLE OF FUNCTIONS AND SUBJECTIVE TESTS (Co&d) SIMULATORL EVEL
A B C
airplane. The sound of a crash should be related
in some logical manner to landing in an unusual
attitude or in excess of the structural gear
limitations of the airplane.
k 0 Effects of airframe icing. X X
Par 3
14
a
9t
w
.
.
.
H
d=‘
H
AC 1 zo-40B
7129191 .
Appendix 4
APPENDIX 4. EXAMPLES (Cont’d)
Name, POI, (Operator)
FAA FSDO
Address
City, State, Zip
0
Dear Mr. .
(Name) Airlines requests evaluation of our (Type)
airplane simulator for Level qualification. The (Name)
simulator with (Name) visual system is fully defined on page
of the accompanying approval test guide (ATG). We have completed tests
of the simulator and certify that it meets all applicable requirements of FAR
Section 121.407 (or FAR Sections 135,335 or 125.297), FAR Part 1% Appendix H,
and the guidance of AC 120040B. Appropriate hardware and software configuration
control procedures have been established. Our pilots have assessed the simulator
and found that it conforms to the (Name) Airlines
(Type) airplane cockpit configuration and that the simulated
systems and subsystems function equivalently to those in the airplane. Our
pilots have also assessed the performance and flying qualities of the simulator
and find that it represents the respective airplane.
(Added comments as desired.)
Sincerely,
FIGURE la Application Letter
I
0
W
I\
:r
AC 120-40B
7/29/91 -
Appendix 5
APPENDIX 5, WINDSHEAQRU ALIFICATIONf- RESERVED1
*U.S. Government Printing OfFice: 1996 - 405-571155748 'I (and 2)
