Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Circular
Federal Aviation
Administration
Date: 06/07/10 AC No: 120-100
Subject: Basics of Aviation Fatigue Initiated by: AFS-200 Change:
1. PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC):
• Summarizes the content of the FAA international symposium on fatigue, “Aviation
Fatigue Management Symposium: Partnerships for Solutions”, June 17-19, 2008;
• Describes fundamental concepts of human cognitive fatigue and how it relates to safe
performance of duties by employees in the aviation industry;
• Provides information on conditions that contribute to cognitive fatigue; and
• Provides information on how individuals and aviation service providers can reduce
fatigue and/or mitigate the effects of fatigue.
2. APPLICABILITY. This AC is not mandatory and does not constitute a regulation.
3. DEFINITIONS.
a. Circadian Challenge. Circadian challenge refers to the difficulty of operating in
opposition to an individual’s normal circadian rhythms or internal biological clock. This occurs
when the internal biological clock and the sleep/wake cycle do not match the local time. For
example, the sleep period is occurring at an adverse circadian phase when the body wants to be
awake. Engaging in activities that are opposite of this natural biological system represents the
circadian challenge (e.g., night work, shift work, jet lag).
b. Cognitive Performance. Cognitive performance refers to the ability to process thought
and engage in conscious intellectual activity, e.g., reaction times, problem solving, vigilant
attention, memory, cognitive throughput. Various studies have demonstrated the negative effects
of sleep loss on cognitive performance.
c. Circadian Rhythm. A circadian rhythm is a daily alteration in a person’s behavior and
physiology controlled by an internal biological clock located in the brain. Examples of circadian
rhythms include body temperature, melatonin levels, cognitive performance, alertness levels, and
sleep patterns.
d. Circadian Synchrony. Circadian synchrony occurs when a person’s internal biological
clock matches the local external time cues (e.g., light/dark cycle, social interaction). In other
words, sleep opportunities occur when the body wants to sleep and waking activities take place
when the body is promoting wakefulness and alertness.
AC 120-100 06/07/10
e. Endogenous Circadian System. The endogenous circadian system refers to the
biological clock in the brain that programs humans to be awake during the day and asleep at
night. It also regulates alertness, performance, and sleepiness levels through the 24-hour day.
This internal system persists independent of periodic changes in the external environment based
on the time of day and can be modified or reset by environmental inputs such as light.
f. Fatigue. Fatigue refers to a physiological state in which there is a decreased capacity to
perform cognitive tasks and an increased variability in performance as a function of time on task.
Fatigue is also associated with tiredness, weakness, lack of energy, lethargy, depression, lack of
motivation, and sleepiness.
g. Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS). FRMS is a scientifically based,
data-driven process and systematic method used to continuously monitor and manage fatigue
risks associated with fatigue-related error. FRMS can be, but is not necessarily required, a
fundamental part of an organization’s Safety Management System (SMS).
h. Homeostatic Sleep Drive. The homeostatic sleep drive is a fundamental neurobiological
process involved in the timing and placement of sleep through a 24-hour day. Sleep is a vital
physiological need and is critical to human existence. Good sleep is as important to health and
well-being as proper nutrition and good exercise. The average adult sleep need is about 8 hours
each day.
i. Safety Management System (SMS). An SMS is a coordinated, comprehensive set of
processes designed to manage resources for optimal safety achievement. An SMS is a systematic
approach to managing safety, including the necessary organizational structures, accountabilities,
policies, and procedures representing a management approach to controlling risk.
j. Sleep Inertia. Sleep inertia (also termed sleep drunkenness) refers to a period of
impaired performance and reduced vigilance following awakening from the regular sleep episode
or nap. This impairment may be severe, last from minutes to hours, and be accompanied by
micro-sleep episodes.
k. Time Givers. This concept comes from the German word, “zeitgeber,” which represents
any external cue that entrains or aligns humans’ internal time-keeping system with external
stimuli. The strongest zeitgeber is light. Other time givers include temperature, social
interactions, pharmacological manipulation, and eating/drinking patterns.
l. Window of Circadian Low (WOCL). Individuals living on a regular 24-hour routine
with sleep at night have two periods of maximum sleepiness, also known as “WOCLs.” One
occurs at night, roughly from 3 a.m. to 5 a.m., a time when physiological sleepiness is greatest
and performance capabilities are lowest. The other is in the afternoon, roughly from
3 p.m. to 5 p.m.
4. RELATED READING MATERIAL.
• Proceedings of the Aviation Fatigue Management Symposium: Partnerships for
Solutions, June 17-19, 2008.
Page 2 Par 3
06/07/10 AC 120-100
• Caldwell, J. A.; Caldwell, J. L. Fatigue in Aviation: A Guide to Staying Awake at the
Stick (Studies in Aviation Psychology and Human Factors). Ashgate Publishing Limited;
2003.
• Dinges, D. F.; Graeber, R. C.; Rosekind, M. R.; Samel, A.; Wegmann, H. M. Principles
and guidelines for duty and rest scheduling in commercial aviation. Moffett Field, CA:
NASA Ames Research Center; 1996. Report No.: 110404.
• Dinges, D.; Mallis, M.; Bankls, S. Aircrew Fatigue & Circadian Rhythmicity (Chapter
13). In Elsevier, E. Salas, T. Allard, & D. Maurino, (Eds), Human Factors in Aviation
(2nd edition), Academic Press; 2009.
• Rosekind, M. R.; Gander, P. H.; Connell, L. J.; Co, E. L. Crew Factors in Flight
Operations X: Alertness Management in Flight Operations Education Module. (NASA
Technical Memorandum 2001-211385 DOT/FAA/AR-01-01). Moffett Field, CA: NASA
Ames Research Center.
5. BACKGROUND. The traditional definition of fatigue is a physiological state in which there
is a decreased capacity to perform cognitive tasks and an increased variability in performance.
While fatigue is often attributed to periods of extended wakefulness in which ample recovery
sleep is not obtained, research has shown that performance and alertness levels are largely
influenced by the complex interaction between sleep and the 24-hour biological clock (circadian
rhythm). In addition, time on task can further increase fatigue. Although research has established
empirically-based knowledge of sleep and circadian principles, current regulations, policies, and
practices do not incorporate this scientific research 31. Thus, the challenge of fatigue among
aviation employees has steadily increased along with fatigue-related concerns over air safety,
due to increasingly complex operations that continue around-the-clock. Accident statistics,
reports from pilots themselves, and operational flight studies all show that fatigue is a clear
concern within aviation operations.
a. Risk Factors. Fatigue associated with aviation operations is a risk factor for occupational
safety, performance effectiveness, and personal wellbeing. The multiple flight legs, long duty
hours, limited time off, early report times, less-than-optimal sleeping conditions, rotating and
non-standard work shifts, and jet lag pose significant challenges for the basic biological
capabilities of pilots, crewmembers and shift workers. Humans simply are not designed to
operate to operate effectively under the pressured 24/7 schedules that often define aviation
operations, whether the operations are short-haul commercial flights, long-range transoceanic
operations, or around-the-clock and shift work operations.
b. Personnel Reports. Short-haul (domestic) pilots commonly identify sleep deprivation
and high workload as the main factors contributing to their fatigue. Long haul crewmembers
generally attribute sleep deprivation and circadian disruption caused by multiple time-zone
crossings as the main causes of fatigue 11. However, fatigue resulting from multiple flight legs,
early wake times, consecutive duty days, insufficient recovery sleep periods, time demands, and
jet lag are reported by both short-haul and long-haul flightcrew. Corporate/executive crews
experience similar fatigue-related problems when compared with their commercial counterparts;
however, scheduling issues (multi-segment flights, night flights, late arrivals, and early
Par 4 Page 3
AC 120-100 06/07/10
awakenings) are the most salient contributing factors to fatigue 75. Pilots also report weather and
turbulence as contributing factors. Shift workers in aviation operations face a different set of
fatigue drivers that affect the same underlying physiology. Because shift patterns can vary
widely, the cause of shift work fatigue can be one or more of a variety of factors. These factors
are night work that deprives a person of normal nighttime sleep, insufficient time between shifts
to get recovery sleep, rotating shifts that force adjustment of the body clock to constantly
changing sleep/wake patterns, and early start times that can shorten nighttime sleep.
6. THE FATIGUED BRAIN.
a. 24-Hour Biological Rhythms. Most organisms show daily behavioral and physiological
changes that are cyclical across the day. A biological clock located in the brain controls these
24-hour cycles in humans—circadian rhythms 64 (see Figure 1). Circadian rhythms result in
two periods of sleepiness (nadirs) throughout the day; the maximum sleep propensity occurs
during the early morning (the latter half of the habitual sleep episode), and the second period of
increased sleep propensity occurs in the mid-afternoon 26, 86. Time givers, environmental stimuli
such as the light/dark cycle and social cues also influence circadian rhythms. These time givers
help to synchronize (entrain) circadian rhythms to the 24-hour day. However, in the absence of
external time cues, the circadian cycle is slightly longer with a free running period of
24 to 28 hours 21. Core body temperature is a reliable marker of fluctuations in the 24-hour clock.
People have increased feelings of sleepiness and reduced performance levels when core body
temperature reaches its low point, or nadir 23. This rhythm affects many dimensions of cognitive
performance (see below) but the most obvious change is an increase in reaction time and
tendency to have lapses in attention often associated with short sleep attacks (micro-sleeps).
b. Sleep. In addition to the circadian component, the daily pattern of sleep strongly
modulates alertness and cognitive performance.
(1) The brain requires a regular pattern of sleep to be fully functional and regulates the
drive to sleep in order to restore alertness and performance.
(2) The average person usually needs about 8 hours of sleep per day to remain fully alert
and functional.
7. FOUR SLEEP-RELATED PROCESSES TO UNDERSTAND.
a. Sleep Regulation. The drive for sleep increases over time since the last sleep period and
with any cumulative deficit in sleep relative to the average 8-hour day requirement. As a
consequence, the sleep drive is at its lowest point in the morning, upon awakening, and as the
day progresses, the drive to sleep increases and the ability to sustain attention and engage in
cognitive activities decreases. Once sleep begins, this drive gradually decreases until awakening.
The system is homeostatic in the sense that the more a person is deprived of good quality sleep
(relative to the nominal 8-hour requirement), the stronger the drive for sleep. The two main
fatigue processes—24 hour (circadian) rhythm and sleep regulation—combine to produce
dynamic changes in sleep tendency and ability to maintain stable alert performance across a
24-hour period and across days (see Figure 1).
Page 4 Par 5
06/07/10 AC 120-100
FIGURE 1. CIRCADIAN PATTERN OF PERFORMANCE
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5
Performance
Night
Duty
Period
Secondary Morning Evening
Window Circadian Circadian
of Peak Peak
Circadian
Low
(SWOCL)
Window
of
Circadian
Low
(WOCL)
sleep awake 8 hr awake nap awake nap awake 9 hr awake 9 hr awake
sleep recovery recovery
sleep sleep
Time
Par 7 Page 5
ssenevitceffE
tnecreP
b. Elevated Sleep Drive. For the average person, the daily upswing in alertness produced
by the circadian system tends to offset the decrease in alertness produced by depletion of the
sleep regulatory process. The result is roughly constant reaction time and lapses during the first
16 hours of the day 85. After about 16 hours of continuous wakefulness, most adults begin to
notice reductions in the speed of performance and in alertness levels 87. However, a prior history
of insufficient sleep quantity and quality can magnify the changes in behavior and alertness.
Consequently, three factors can result in elevated homeostatic sleep drive:
• Increasing time continuously awake,
• Inadequate sleep duration for one or more consecutive days,
• Physiologically disrupted (fragmented) sleep due to medical conditions
(e.g., untreated sleep disorder such as obstructive sleep apnea) or environmental
factors (e.g., attempting to sleep upright or in an uncomfortable environment).
c. Desynchronization. The timing of sleep and wakefulness of most humans, under natural
conditions, is consistent with the circadian control of the sleep cycle and all other
circadian-controlled rhythms. However, people working in a developed society override their
internal biological clock and attempt to sleep at times that are not always consistent with the
biological drive to sleep. For example, when individuals travel rapidly across time zones or work
the night shift, the sleep/wake cycle is out of phase with the biological rhythms controlled by the
circadian clock. This can adversely affect both alertness while awake and at work, and the ability
to achieve restorative sleep 23. This sort of disruption of circadian synchrony can result in
AC 120-100 06/07/10
difficulties, such as impaired cognitive function, sleepiness, altered hormonal function, and
gastrointestinal complaints 72, 76.
d. Sleep Inertia. This sleep-related process causes a temporary degradation in performance
immediately after awakening. The degradation or loss of alertness is dependent on depth of sleep
at the time of awakening. The degradation dissipates, after awakening, on a time scale ranging
from minutes to a few hours (see Figure 1). Sleep inertia causes a feeling of drowsiness or
lethargy and can be measured as a noticeable change in reaction time and potential for lapses in
attention. The duration and severity of sleep inertia is related to the depth of sleep at the time of
awakening. It tends to be greater after short sleep periods of an hour or two, when the need for
sleep is not fully satisfied, or after sleep when the person is carrying a large sleep debt from prior
sleep restrictions 10, 23, 88.
8. EFFECTS OF FATIGUE ON HUMAN PERFORMANCE.
a. Cognitive Performance is a Safety Critical Process. Maintaining optimal alertness and
neurobehavioral functioning in operational environments is critical for achieving high levels of
safety, efficiency, and success. High levels of alertness and performance are necessary to operate
complex technology and machinery as well as to make critical task decisions on a sustained
basis. Individuals working erratic schedules experience conflicts between the biological
circadian rhythm and environmental time cues and work demands. This physiological conflict
can cause a sense of drowsiness (subjective fatigue), mood changes, performance degradation,
and physiological upset 44. Two adverse effects of the circadian conflict between the sleep/wake
pattern and the biological rhythm worsen performance levels and sleepiness:
• Trying to sleep when a person’s biology is highly energized, and
• Attempting to maintain alertness and high cognitive functioning at a time when a
person’s biological clock is programming the body to sleep.
(1) Figure 1 is a diagram of performance across days and illustrates the circadian patterns
in performance (dark line). There are two peaks in performance—one in the late morning and
one in the early evening. After about 7 p.m., the circadian rhythm in performance begins to
decline and if the person stays awake throughout the night, as on Day 3, will experience a strong
early morning low (nadir) in performance referred to as the WOCL—generally between
3 a.m. and 5 a.m. This is a period of generally low alertness and performance and elevated
operational risk; it is also the optimal time to obtain restorative sleep. There is a secondary dip in
alertness in the early afternoon, referred to as the secondary WOCL, which is a period of
increase drowsiness and performance risk lasting for several hours. The secondary WOCL is a
relatively good time to obtain a brief nap, if additional sleep is necessary. The exact
synchronization of this rhythm with the clock varies somewhat from individual to individual, and
the relative size of the morning and evening peaks in performance also varies between people 43,
52. We refer to those who feel best in the morning as “larks” and those who feel most energized
in the evening as “owls.” The person diagrammed in Figure 1 is neutral with approximately
symmetrical peaks in morning and evening performance.
Page 6 Par 7
06/07/10 AC 120-100
(2) In Figure 1, note that on Day 3, after missing a single night of sleep and having a
3 hour nap in the morning, evening performance is about 10 percent below what it would be on a
normal day, see Day 1. The effect of this single period of sleep deprivation has lasting effects;
after 2 days of recovery with 9 hours of sleep, performance is not fully recovered. For this
hypothetical person, it would take an additional day to recover full capability.
b. Objective Performance Changes. Laboratory and simulator studies have documented
changes in all aspects of neurobehavioral functioning associated with fatigue and sleep loss. As
little as 2 hours of sleep loss a day can result in impaired performance and alertness 19, and the
decrements are especially apparent during late night and early morning hours 62. Although the
degree to which sleep loss affects individuals and how that sleep loss is expressed varies greatly
among people 36, 48, 87, all fatigued and sleepy individuals begin to have decrements in attention
and vigilance. Total sleep deprivation is not necessary to produce profound changes in
performance. When sleep is restricted over successive days, serious cumulative performance
deficits can occur in less than 1 week 3, 34, 87. For example, 4 days of sleep restriction from
8 hours to 5 hours sleep per night can lead to performance changes as severe as that produced by
40 hours of total sleep deprivation. Lapses, brief periods in which an individual fails to respond
to a stimulus, increase in frequency and duration as sleepiness levels increase 29, 32. Other notable
and observable performance decrements are 6, 18, 29, 32, 47, 65, 92:
• Slowed reaction times;
• Cognitive slowing (logical reasoning, mental arithmetic, coding-decoding);
• Difficulties maintaining situational awareness; and
• Impaired short-term memory.
c. Error Rates. People working regular 24-hour sleep/wake schedules with sufficient time
to sleep will experience little change in performance and subjective fatigue during waking hours
from 1 to 2 hours after awakening to 1 to 2 hours before sleep onset 22, 51. However, in many
work environments, an increase in error rates and accident likelihood often occurs in the early
afternoon, between 2 p.m. and 4 p.m. It is followed by a much larger increase in risk in the early
morning hours between 2 a.m. and 4 a.m. that roughly coincides with the minimum of the
circadian rhythm of core body temperature, as illustrated in Figure 1 10, 38, 54, 90.
d. Subjective Fatigue. People are not the best evaluators of their own alertness state.
People can lose awareness of their own fatigue levels. They are often sleepier than they report.
Although individuals report feeling increasing levels of sleepiness and fatigue with the
progression of sleep loss, research has shown that these subjective estimates are unreliable 27, 49,
74, 95. Environmental conditions can affect subjective estimates. If an individual is in a highly
engaged environment involving physical activity or interaction with other individuals, the
person’s underlying sleepiness may not be noticeable and that person may rate him or herself as
being more alert than his or her physiological responses indicate. This creates challenges for
detecting and managing alertness and cognitive capability in operational environments because
individuals often do not notice the gradual changes in performance until it is too late to take
corrective action 33, 58.
Par 8 Page 7
AC 120-100 06/07/10
e. Mood. Fatigue can affect overall mood. Sleepy individuals often show deteriorations in
mood and have reductions in amount and quality of communication and social interaction with
other individuals. This can have serious consequences for crews and workgroups that rely on the
exchange of information to provide mutual support and avoid errors. Workers often report
workload as an important component of subjective fatigue. A flightcrew that performs many
flight segments in a duty period will report more subjective fatigue than a crew that has a single
flight segment taking the same amount of time 11. It is not known if this kind of fatigue results in
reduced neurobehavioral functioning but it can combine with actual sleep loss to amplify the
sense of fatigue reported by crewmembers. Time on task can also increase fatigue and accident
risk. Studies show that after 8 hours of uninterrupted work, chances of error and accidents
increase. Providing short breaks from work can greatly attenuate this effect 39.
9. SOURCES OF FATIGUE IN AVIATION.
a. Flight Operations. Sleep loss is one of the primary contributors to fatigue in flightcrew
and is directly related to a variety of scheduling factors. Scheduling factors exist independent of
the type of operation (i.e., short-haul, long-haul, ultra-long haul). For example, pilots report early
morning report times and extended duty days as contributing to increased fatigue levels 11, 69.
Powell and colleagues found that it is not uncommon for pilot shifts to begin before 7 a.m. 69.
Thus, pilots are required to awaken near their low point in body temperature when sleep pressure
is high and alertness levels are low. Additionally, sleep duration is often shortened due to sleep
difficulties associated with trying to initiate sleep earlier the night prior in an attempt to
compensate for an earlier wake time, which can be in conflict with the circadian system. In a
sample of pilots observed over a 15-day period, sleep log and actigraphy data revealed that sleep
prior to a duty day was reduced by almost 2 hours 70. Consequently, these pilots begin their flight
with a sleep debt, and if sleep is shortened across consecutive days, the debt can be cumulative.
The sleep debt can also be aggravated by extended duty days involving work hours that continue
into biological night. Thus, aviation schedules that require combinations of early start times and
late evening (or early morning) end times make it difficult to maintain a regular sleep/wake cycle
and reduce the opportunities available for recovery sleep. Research has shown that long-haul
pilots commonly are awake longer than 20 hours, particularly on upwind flight segments 77, 41.
Schedules that involve short turn-around times between flights, resulting in an increase in
takeoffs and landings and additional time constraints contributing to an increased workload,
challenge short-haul crews. Short-haul pilots have reported that schedules consisting of
4 to 5 legs of flight are one of their more fatiguing schedules to fly 11.
b. Common Scheduling Factors. There are several common scheduling factors that can
have major impact on sleep and alertness.
(1) Time Awake Prior to Duty. It is not just the duration of the duty day that is
important. Time since awakening before the crew starts their duty period is equally, if not more,
important. With the manufacturing of ultra long-range (ULR) aircraft and duty times
approaching 20 hours, extended waking hours become unavoidable. Thus, time since awakening
continues to become a more significant factor contributing to fatigue levels of flightcrew. Data
collected from glass cockpit rated pilots during a simulated ULR flight found that pilots who
departed at night, after being awake for at least 13.5 hours, had significantly reduced reaction
times compared to pilots who departed during the morning hours, after about 3.5 hours of
Page 8 Par 8
06/07/10 AC 120-100
wakefulness. Pilots in the nighttime group were particularly impaired during the first half of the
flight due to both sleep and circadian factors that were promoting sleep. However, towards the
end of the flight, as continuous hours of wakefulness increased, performance decrements were
seen in both morning and nighttime departure groups 15.
(2) Layover Sleep Opportunities. Upon arrival at layover destinations, sleep
opportunities often conflict with a pilot’s biological clock. For example, it can be local day at the
layover city but the pilot’s biological clock is programming them for sleep because it is
nighttime at their home base. Thus, a crewmember’s ability to obtain restorative recovery sleep
is reduced before continuing duty. Obtaining optimal recovery sleep can also be a challenge if
the layover city is in the same time zone as a pilot’s home base. While there may be an
opportunity for a crewmember to obtain a nap during the afternoon secondary WOCL 17, 28 in
preparation for a nighttime departure, there is no guarantee that the individuals will be able to
obtain sleep. Some individuals may choose not to take advantage of the napping opportunity, and
others may not be able to nap at odd hours of the day. Therefore, it is essential that scheduled
layovers include multiple sleep opportunities, and thus sufficient recovery sleep, prior to the
return flight. Total sleep time per 24-hour period is one of the most influential determining factor
of performance, even when sleep time is an aggregate of major sleep period and a nap
(i.e., a split-sleep schedule) 63.
c. Opportunities for Recovery Sleep.
(1) Small reductions in sleep during a single trip may not cause serious changes in
alertness and performance; however, if these small reductions are not made up after the trip prior
to another trip, then the potential for serious accumulated sleep debt can occur. Studies have
shown that an accumulation of only 1 hour of sleep loss per day over a week can have
measurable effects on reaction time that may take several days to dissipate after the person
returns to a normal sleep schedule 3, 87.
(2) Recent studies have also shown that rapid recovery from accumulated sleep debt
requires that the person take deliberate steps to sleep more than the usual nominal 8 hours per
day. It may take the average person several days of 9 hours of sleep or more to recover from a
serious sleep debt. Hence, train staff to use recovery periods to sleep more than their usual
amount to prevent accumulated sleep debt across an extended work or duty schedule.
d. Night Operations. Operational demands and advances in technology have led to the
scheduling of flight operations throughout the 24-hour day. Thus, flight schedules require pilots
to fly and shift workers to work on the “backside” of the clock, performing during times when
they would normally be asleep. A survey of 739 airline pilots rated schedules involving
nighttime inbound and outbound flights with daytime layover periods as especially fatiguing 11.
Nighttime flights involve increased continuous hours of wakefulness before duty, especially if
the pilot was not able to obtain an afternoon nap. Thus, a person may frequently awaken in the
morning and remain awake the entire day before duty begins in the evening for a night flight.
e. Circadian Shifts and “Jet Lag.”
Par 9 Page 9
AC 120-100 06/07/10
(1) Jet lag, resulting from crossing multiple time zones is another challenge in aviation
operations, even for experienced flightcrews 53. The rate of adaptation after crossing multiple
time zones depends on both the number of time zones crossed and the direction of travel.
Adjustment to westward travel is quicker than adjustment to eastward travel. Eastbound travel
requires the individual to reduce their day to less than 24 hours (i.e., the circadian period is
shortened), whereas westbound travel lengthens the circadian period 12, 76. Lengthening the day
and staying awake longer than 24-hours is easier because of the inherent period of the circadian
rhythm being slightly longer than 24 hours.
(2) Circadian adaptation is less likely to occur during long-haul trips of less than 3 days
because it does not allow enough time for resynchronization of internal biological rhythms with
the external environment; therefore, pilots can minimize circadian disruption by keeping the
most similar sleep/wake schedule to their home time zone as possible 57. However, the exact
timing of the circadian clock and rate of adaptation with multiple time zone crossings is not
easily predictable, and thus a prescriptive formula for calculating a precise number of days
needed for circadian adaptation in long haul crews is difficult without considering physiological,
environmental, and operational factors 41.
f. Shift Work Operations. Fatigue is not only a challenge for flightcrew but is inherent in
aviation shift work operations including Air Traffic Control and ground maintenance operations.
Due to around-the-clock aviation operations, air traffic and ground personnel are faced with
shifted schedules that interfere with ‘normal’ sleep/wake cycles that permit night-time sleep and
daytime work. Shift work has traditionally included only night work and rotating shift schedules,
however, the modern definition is more comprehensive. It includes any schedule that can
potentially affect both sleep and circadian rhythms. Specifically, any schedule outside the
traditional 7 a.m.-6 p.m. timeframe can be categorized as shift work and such shifts are
becoming increasingly common 84.
(1) Sleep difficulties are commonly associated with shift work because sleep disturbances
and sleepiness are the most commonly reported complaints of shift workers 55, 66, 84. Although
false, it is a not uncommon belief that as the shift worker adapts to their schedule over time and
gets used to the non-standard shift, all of their problems associated with shift work are alleviated.
However, shift work is not just about sleep; it is a more complex issue.
(2) Shift work is not simply a term used to describe non-standard schedules. It also is
associated with the disruption of an individual’s underlying physiology. Shift work requires
people to override the internal biological clock that programs humans for daytime activity and
nighttime sleep 9. This produces circadian misalignment, a condition in which the biological
clock remains synchronized to the local time, driven by exposure to the local pattern of sunlight,
but the sleep/wake cycle is out of sync with the local time. In other words, the sleep period is
occurring at an adverse circadian phase, when the body is programmed to be awake. As a result,
one can experience sleep difficulties (e.g., longer than normal times to fall asleep and early
termination of sleep) resulting in continuous partial sleep deprivation and chronic sleep loss. The
shift worker is further challenged by the fact that his or her sleep/wake cycle is constantly altered
between work days and non-work days due to conflicting time cues from the day/night cycle and
a day-oriented society (e.g., keeping the same day schedule as the family on non-work days).
Page 10 Par 9
06/07/10 AC 120-100
(3) A number of common scheduling factors disrupt sleep and circadian rhythms and
affect alertness and performance of shift workers in aviation environment. These work schedule
factors might include early start times, variable work periods, insufficient recovery time,
consecutive work periods, and on-call status, among others.
10. PREDICTIVE MODELS OF SLEEP, FATIGUE, AND PERFORMANCE.
a. Biomathematical Models of Fatigue and Performance. Predictive modeling algorithms
can forecast the effects of fatigue on performance and risk. These models can be an important
tool for work scheduling. Modeling can help minimize fatigue related errors, incidents and
accidents during flight operations or shift work environments. These models are scheduling tools
that can help to quantify the impact of underlying interaction of sleep and circadian physiology
on performance levels.
(1) The theoretical framework of most of these models is the two-process model of sleep
and alertness 1 that incorporates mathematical simulations of the two major processes in
Figure 1, sleep regulation and circadian variation. Several initiatives are currently underway that
incorporate the application of biomathematical modeling software to:
(a) Predict the times that neurobehavioral functions and performance will remain
constant,
(b) Establish ideal time periods for maximal recovery sleep, and
(c) Determine the cumulative effects of different work-rest schedules on
performance 59.
(2) Such models can serve as useful tools when evaluating the placement and timing of
critical flight phases to assist in the scheduling of in-flight rest periods and layover sleep
opportunities. While most of the biomathematical modeling software show promise in the
prediction of performance, it is important that models used for scheduling have demonstrated
validity for prediction of operational risk when applied with real world data 30. In other words,
one can plan with the model but must confirm the effect.
(3) The Federal Railroad Administration has sponsored a study that validated the ability
of a biomathematical model, considering only work schedule information, to predict the
increased risk of accidents with reduced cognitive effectiveness and increased fatigue.
Subsequent work demonstrated that the same model could predict an increased severity of
accidents (property damage) with increased fatigue 50.
b. Limits of Modeling. Currently, predictive fatigue models describe the effects of sleep
history and circadian rhythms on the performance of an average person, assuming that the person
requires about 8 hours of sleep per night to remain fully rested and has a regular circadian
rhythm that favors neither the morning nor the evening for peak cognitive alertness. Efforts are
underway to design procedures to tailor fatigue models to the characteristics of individuals but
those tools require performance information from the individual to direct the changes to the
model. The availability of data and assumptions about initial conditions also limits modeling
Par 9 Page 11
AC 120-100 06/07/10
application. Any model must start at some point in time and must assume some initial level of
fatigue prior to the period of examination. Most models assume a fully rested person at the start.
c. Sleep Estimation. While measurement of sleep is possible for research studies, it is
seldom available for operational assessment or forecasting of fatigue. All two-process
physiological models for fatigue require an algorithm to estimate the amount of sleep obtainable
under a particular work schedule, since it is sleep that restores performance and wakefulness that
exhausts performance. Sleep estimation requires a thorough understanding of how workers adapt
sleep patterns to the demands of their work schedule. Sleep estimation assumptions that work
well for one group of workers may not work well to predict sleep in another group of workers;
hence, sleep estimation algorithms that drive fatigue models must be validated for the specific
work group for reasonable concordance with their typical sleep patterns. This is particularly
important for work groups adapted to night work, split shifts, or on-duty sleep schedules.
11. STRATEGIES TO MITIGATE THE EFFECTS OF FATIGUE.
a. Recovery Sleep. We know that the longer one works without adequate opportunity to
sleep, the greater the need for recovery sleep to prevent an accumulation of fatigue across duty
periods. To some extent, FAA regulations codify this principle and specify off-duty rest periods
that are proportional to the prior flight time. We now recognize that what is most important from
a fatigue perspective is the total duration of duty that limits sleep opportunities. In general, the
longer the period of duty, the more likely that duty will interfere with the nominal requirement to
obtain 8 hours of sleep per day. However, circadian factors are very important in this calculation;
10 hours of duty starting at 8 a.m. will interfere less with normal nighttime sleep than 10 hours of
duty starting at 10 p.m. Hence, the calculation of needed recovery sleep is complex since it
depends on the circadian timing of the duty periods. Furthermore, the effects of sleep restriction
are cumulative and the longer the period of sleep restriction, the greater the need for recovery
sleep. There is some evidence that prolonged sleep restriction can lead to a slowing of the
recovery process.
(1) The duration of the recovery sleep will depend on the amount of sleep loss that occurs
as a result of a sequence of duty periods. The amount of recovery sleep required to fully restore
performance will increase with the total amount of missed sleep since the person was fully
rested, that is, had sufficient sleep to be fully alert.
(2) The amount of recovery sleep required to repay the deficit from sleep restriction is
related to the total amount of sleep debt. Since the sleep regulatory process is adaptive, the
amount of sleep required to make up a deficit is less than the total number of hours of sleep
missed; it does not take 8 additional hours of sleep to make up for an 8-hour accumulated sleep
debt. However, since it takes 8 hours of sleep to balance a normal day of wakefulness, it will
require more than 8 hours of sleep per recovery day to repay the debt. In general, if a person has
experienced several days of sleep restriction below the nominal requirement of 8 hours per day,
full recovery of performance may require several days of 9 hours or more sleep per day.
(3) For recovery sleep to be an effective mitigation, the schedule must permit an adequate
number of recovery nights of sleep and the employee must be trained to use those recovery days
Page 12 Par 10
06/07/10 AC 120-100
efficiently by taking more than the nominal 8 hours of sleep per day. Hence, effective recovery
sleep is a shared responsibility of the scheduler and the employee.
b. Napping. Sleep is the only way to reverse sleepiness. Therefore, at times when some
amount of sleep is possible but limited, napping is the most effective physiological strategy for
restoring alertness levels. Naps have shown to be beneficial for restoring both performance and
alertness levels, especially during long periods of wakefulness 4, 5, 35, 60, 71, 72, 89, 91. Even short
naps of 25-30 minutes can have beneficial effects. Controlled studies have shown that a nap can
yield significant improvements in subsequent pilot alertness and vigilance performance
compared to similar pilots who did not receive the nap so methods that augment crews to permit
napping outside the cockpit is a viable fatigue countermeasure under current FAA rules. The
FAA authorizes in-flight naps for flightcrew if there is an augmented complement so that
two pilots are on the flight deck while the augmented crewmembers are resting. Although a
number of foreign air carriers authorized in-seat cockpit naps during flight, the FAA does not
authorize such in-seat cockpit naps 42.
c. In-Flight Rostering and Bunk Sleep (Flight-Ops Specific). In-flight rostering, although
not commonly discussed as a fatigue countermeasure, can help minimize fatigue. It refers to the
scheduling of augmented flightcrew to assigned positions on the flight deck, freeing other
flightcrew to obtain in-flight rest or bunk sleep. In-flight rostering is directly related to the crew
complement, or number of crewmembers assigned to the flight and is determined—in advance—
during the scheduling process. Performance and alertness begin to deteriorate after 18-20 hours
of continuous wakefulness 7. However, an increased likelihood of incidents and accidents has
occurred in shift workers after only 8-9 hour duty periods 39, 81. In a review of aviation accidents,
the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) found that when “time since awakening”
exceeded the median for crew position, there was an increase in overall errors 67. In light of these
facts, it is essential to provide a sufficient number of crewmembers so that there are multiple
opportunities for rest.
(1) The effects of continuous hours of wakefulness on alertness and performance can be
minimized with the use of efficient in-flight rostering, which helps to ensure that at least one
flightcrew member is always rested 16. Use the following two principles:
(a) Scheduling bunk sleep periods that minimize the number of hours of extended
wakefulness for the landing crew.
(b) Scheduling flightcrew to perform who just had a recent bunk sleep opportunity
and have an increased chance of being well-rested during critical phases of flight.
NOTE: It is essential to consider rostering in the planning stages of the
flight, educate the crew about the rostering approach, and that the crew
adheres to the rostering and napping schedule during the flight.
(2) There is a lack of research concerning the specific number of crewmembers necessary
to guarantee adequate sleep opportunities for sufficient performance and safety in the context of
extended aviation operations. Although it is clear that more crewmembers are necessary to
Par 11 Page 13
AC 120-100 06/07/10
improve the alertness of other crewmembers, an empirical and evidence-based approach is
needed to improve the current situation 16.
(a) The ULR Crew Alertness workshops of the FAA’s 2008 Fatigue Symposium
showed that ensuring adequate bunk sleep is one of the most important in-flight countermeasures
to use to address sleep loss and circadian disruption during extended aviation operations 37. The
only way to reverse cumulative sleep debt is to obtain sleep because it addresses the underlying
physiology of sleep loss. For example, if flight demands permit, physiological sleepiness can be
reduced by utilizing periods of increased sleepiness during circadian low points, which, in turn,
can contribute to increased quantity and quality of bunk sleep 17, 24, 26. Thus, in-flight sleep
periods are an operationally feasible approach to manage sleep loss associated with complex
aviation schedules (e.g., extended wakefulness, crossing multiple time zones, and nighttime
duty hours).
(b) Although proper bunk-sleep scheduling is both a feasible and operational
approach for managing alertness, scheduled sleep periods often occur at less than optimal time
periods due to conflicting crewmember job responsibilities. Therefore, efforts should be made to
optimize the in-flight sleep periods for the primary crew, who have responsibility for critical
flight maneuvers such as landings and takeoffs. Timing of in-flight sleep for the primary crew
must be part of the rest planning process.
(3) Crewmembers have indicated that environmental factors in the bunk facilities
influence the quality of in-flight rest periods. A NASA survey revealed that the most common
factors that conflicted with quality bunk sleep were ambient temperature, noise from the galley
and elsewhere, and background lighting 75. Pilots who completed the survey also indicated that
making the bunk facilities more private and having comfortable bedding and blankets would help
promote better quality and quantity of bunk sleep. Many of these issues can be addressed during
the design stage of bunk facilities.
(4) Finally, the duration of in-flight rest breaks (sleep opportunities) should be limited to
no longer than about 6 hours. Studies have shown that even when given longer than 6 hours to
sleep in the bunk, relatively few crewmembers can take advantage of that additional time.
Merely providing pilots with more sleep opportunities does not guarantee that they will obtain
more sleep. For example, flightcrews given a 5-hour bunk sleep opportunity obtained only
around 3 hours of sleep, on average 46. Signal and colleagues found that flightcrews who had a
7-hour sleep opportunity obtained, on average, only 3 hours 25 minutes of bunk sleep 79. This is
due to a range of factors that limit the length of time a pilot can remain asleep in the bunk and
the need to limit the continuous in-seat time of the relief crew. Given the time to prepare for
sleep and then return to duty after sleep, in-flight measurements indicate that actual bunk sleep
times seldom last longer than 5 hours. In light of the limitations on rest break utilization, two rest
breaks of 3 to 5 hours each are probably better than a single break of 8 hours for long duration
flights. Plans for utilization of in-flight bunk sleep opportunities must consider multiple
interacting factors.
(a) Length of in-flight sleep needed to remain alert at critical phases of flight;
(b) Circadian timing of the sleep opportunity;
Page 14 Par 11
06/07/10 AC 120-100
(c) Need for occasional use of the toilet facility outside the rest facility;
(d) Length of in-seat time of the relief crew;
(e) Comfort, vibration, turbulence, and noise that can fragment sleep;
(f) Time needed to undress and redress for duty; and
(g) Time after sleep to wake up and become fully alert—dissipate sleep inertia.
d. Activity Breaks. Short breaks can serve to increase alertness by reducing the monotony
of a highly automated cockpit environment through conscious disengagement with the flying
task and, possibly, by allowing mild physical activity, depending on the type of break and the
behaviors allowed during the break. Although not as effective as some other countermeasures,
anecdotal reports from pilots indicate that many take brief, out-of-the-seat breaks as a fatigue
countermeasure.
(1) Several studies indicate an improvement in alertness and performance associated with
a cognitive break from continuous tasks. Even short 5-minute breaks can relieve monotony,
increase overall productivity, and reduce reports of physical fatigue 40. Others studies have
shown that breaks also can have positive effects when individuals are experiencing partial or
total sleep loss. Two total sleep deprivation studies ranging from 54 to 64 hours of continuous
wakefulness revealed that participants who received 5 20-minute rest breaks exhibited
improvements in performance, alertness, fatigue, and overall mood compared to participants who
did not receive any breaks 45. These physiological and performance improvements also have
been observed in aviation environments, in which rest breaks have helped military pilots working
sustained operations to overcome fatigue 2.
NOTE: Rest breaks are not a substitute for adequate sleep and not all
studies have shown beneficial effects 83.
(2) Activity breaks that allow an individual to change posture by getting up out of their
seat and walking or otherwise physically moving while engaging in increased social interaction
can increase alertness levels; however, studies indicate that the beneficial effects can be
short-lived, especially when the crew have been awake for more than 18 hours 68, 61.
(3) The beneficial effects of breaks are due in part to postural changes that occur when a
pilot temporarily hands off flight-related tasks. There are consistent results from
laboratory-based sleep deprivation research examining the effects of posture. Simply standing up
can increase physiological arousal, decrease reaction times, and increase measures of attention in
drowsy subjects 25.
e. Light. Research has shown that the use of properly timed bright light can shift human
circadian rhythms. In addition, some research suggests that light may have an immediate and
acute alerting effect on mood and performance, independent of its circadian phase-shifting
capacity. The alerting effects of light may be a result of its suppression of melatonin, a
neurotransmitter released in the mid- to late-evening. Therefore, light may be a powerful
Par 11 Page 15
AC 120-100 06/07/10
mitigator of the usual alertness and performance decline common to nighttime duty, especially
during aviation operations.
(1) Bright light is not necessary for measurable improvements in alertness. Cajochen and
colleagues showed measurable increases in subjective alertness and reductions in slow eye
movements with normal indoor lighting (100-200 lux) 14. Short wavelength light in the blue
portion of the spectrum appears to have the greatest alerting effect 56 with the spectrum of typical
room light containing enough energy in the shorter wavelengths to be effective.
(2) The alerting effects of light may be independent of time of day, making light a
possible daytime countermeasure for those who have experienced prior sleep deprivation, and
thus improve alertness and performance.
(3) Finally, while light can have beneficial effects while at work, exposure to sunlight
after a night shift could inhibit the ability to get to sleep in the morning 78. This is primarily due
to the alerting effects of light and suppression of melatonin. Therefore, avoid sunlight after a
night shift and prior to a morning sleep period, when possible.
f. Caffeine. Caffeine can be an effective countermeasure in improving alertness and
performance levels 8, 88, 93. Caffeine takes 15-30 minutes to enter the bloodstream after
consumption, and thus alertness effects do not occur immediately. However, its effects can
persist up to 5 hours after ingestion. Another characteristic of caffeine that makes it a common
countermeasure used by pilots to maintain alertness is that it is readily available in beverages
such as coffee, tea, and soft drinks. Minimal use of caffeine is not generally associated with the
undesirable effects often associated with chronic use (i.e., tolerance, gastrointestinal problems,
increased blood pressure, etc.). Individual differences exist in people’s response to caffeine
including its effect on performance levels and sleep structure. Before using caffeine as a fatigue
countermeasure, individuals should ground test it (as with any countermeasure) to determine its
specific effects with their physiology.
12. IDENTIFYING FATIGUE IN AVIATION OPERATIONS.
a. Studies of Fatigue in Simulators and Operational Environments. Both simulator and
in-flight studies conducted during flight operations and within shift work environments have
documented that fatigue impairs central nervous system functioning.
(1) Long-haul pilots are particularly susceptible to vigilance lapses during low-workload
periods, and such lapses could simultaneously appear in both crewmembers at the same time 13.
(2) In-flight recordings of brain activity have found that pilot micro-sleeps occurred most
frequently during the cruise portion of long haul operations (in the middle-to-late segments of the
flight) and that micro-sleeps were more than 9 times as likely during nighttime flights compared
to daytime flights 94. Spontaneous micro-sleeps increase with increasing flight duration 77.
(3) Despite strong motivation to be alert during the final stages of a flight, studies of
brain activity and eye-closures indicate that physiological micro-events can occur during the
period from top-of-descent to landing 74.
Page 16 Par 11
06/07/10 AC 120-100
(4) Of the 1,424 flightcrew members responding to a NASA survey of fatigue factors in
regional airline operations, 80 percent acknowledged having “nodded off” during a flight at some
time 20.
(5) Results of a survey involving corporate/executive aviation operations, 71 percent of
1,488 flightcrew members reported having nodded off during duty 73.
b. Evidence of Fatigue from Accident Investigations. Fatigue has been, and continues to
be, a contributing factor in aviation accidents. Currently, the NTSB has seven aviation
fatigue-specific recommendations. Since 1993, the NTSB has determined that fatigue contributed to
7 air carrier accidents within the United States, resulting in 250 fatalities and 52 serious injuries.
Recent events continually highlight the operational relevance of fatigue among flightcrew; it is
not uncommon that crew fall asleep while flying. NTSB investigations have found that
flightcrew on long duty days (a shift of more than 13 hours) exhibit a disproportionate amount of
accidents when compared to those on short duty days (a shift of less than 13 hours). The longer
the crews are awake, the more errors they tend to commit, especially cognitive errors such as
decisionmaking.
(1) NTSB investigators divide the causes of fatigue into operational and personal factors.
Operational factors contributing to fatigue induced by the workplace include short rest periods
between shifts, which can be as short as 8 hours under current regulations, rapid rotation of shift
start times, which can disrupt circadian rhythms, working early morning and graveyard shifts,
and duration of commute, among others. Equally important are personal drivers of fatigue, which
are largely habits and behaviors controlled by the individual, such as ensuring proper duration of
rest. However, personal drivers of fatigue also depend on many factors such as the presence of
sleep disorders, circadian variability, additional employment, and use of alcohol and stimulants.
(2) The table, below, of recent aviation accidents attributed in part to crew fatigue was
presented during the NTSB keynote address at the FAA Fatigue Symposium.
Airline Date Probable Cause Outcome
American International 1993 Impaired judgment, decisionmaking 3 serious injuries.
808 and flying abilities due to fatigue.
Korean Air 801 1997 Crew failure to prepare for/execute 228 fatalities;
non-precision approach. 26 serious injuries.
American Airlines 1420 1999 Flightcrew failure to discontinue 11 fatalities;
approach and ensure that spoilers had 45 serious injuries.
extended after touchdown. Contributing
factor was the flightcrew’s impaired
performance due to fatigue.
Federal Express 1478 2002 Crew failure to establish and maintain 3 serious injuries.
proper glidepath at night. Fatigue was
contributing factor.
Par 12 Page 17
AC 120-100 06/07/10
Corporate Airline 2004 Combination of fatigue related factors 13 fatalities;
producing pilot error. 2 serious injuries.
Shuttle America 2007 Fatigue contributing factor affecting No fatalities.
ability to plan and monitor approach
leading to runway overrun.
13. MEASUREMENT AND MITIGATION OF FATIGUE RISK.
a. Factors in Fatigue Risk. Fatigue due to extended work hours, time of day, and shift
work induces reductions in vigilance and reaction time and increases in risk of poor decisions,
human error, incidents, and accidents. As described earlier, cognitive fatigue results from the
interaction of sleep limitations and circadian drives for sleepiness with time-on-task and
cumulative duty time effects. Human error due to fatigue is the result of sporadic losses of brain
function and attention that increase in frequency with reductions in sleep and circadian drive for
sleep. Lapses in attention are random in time, making it difficult to demonstrate the role of
fatigue in specific accident cases. Self-reported, subjective sleepiness cannot be relied upon in
this context, because it has a low correlation with actual performance impairment. One way to
understand the role of fatigue in accident risk is to consider that fatigue causes random periods of
inattention that occasionally coincide with operational conditions that demand attention to avert a
serious event or incident. Hence, accident risk increases when either:
(1) Lapses of attention increase in frequency due to sleep loss or circadian factors; or
(2) Work demands increase the need for attention.
b. Mitigation of Fatigue Risk. There are two main strategies to reduce fatigue-related
accident risk: a) decrease fatigue factors that drive lapses in attention, or b) alter the job so that
the task is less sensitive to lapses in attention.
(1) Factors leading to fatigue reviewed above—in brief, they are:
• Time since awakening,
• Cumulative sleep debt, and
• Circadian rhythm of attention.
(a) Determining how multiple fatigue factors combine to lead to heightened risk is
difficult without the aid of a computer simulation of fatigue factors and how they combine to
increase lapses in attention and heighten fatigue risk.
(b) Biomathematical fatigue models or simulations can derive from the work
schedule and likely sleep under those schedules, and the fatigue factors that reduce performance
and attention and increase risk of errors and accidents. Fatigue models can help improve
performance and safety in operational settings by pointing to job-related factors, such as work
Page 18 Par 12
06/07/10 AC 120-100
scheduling, sleep opportunities, and individual sleep habits, which could be changed to reduce
the chances of fatigue-related attention lapses that could lead to errors and accidents.
(c) Arranging for less schedule-induced fatigue is important but is only half of the
equation. The staff and crews must use sleep opportunities effectively to be rested and prepared
for duty. Training of staff and crews should provide basic information on fatigue as contained in
this AC, including the measures that individuals should take to be fully rested for duty. Staff and
crews need to know that alert performance requires sufficient sleep prior to duty and recovery
sleep following duty to prevent cumulative sleep debt.
(2) Operators can modify the work environment to minimize the consequences of fatigue.
For example, training of crews to work together better as a team—commonly known as Crew
Resource Management (CRM)—can reduce the chances of fatigue-related mistakes. CRM
training includes a range of knowledge, skills, and attitudes that improve the quality of
communications, situational awareness, problem solving, decisionmaking, and teamwork. Taken
together, these teamwork skills and procedures can catch fatigue-related errors before they
adversely affect operations. In addition, the flight control systems themselves can be modified to
provide alerts and warnings to pilots to supplement attention to the instruments, reducing the
chances that a lapse of attention will lead to a mishap.
14. FATIGUE RISK MANAGEMENT.
a. Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS).
(1) Prescriptive flight and duty time limitations and rest requirements reduce, but do not
eliminate, the conditions that lead to fatigue. FRMSs potentially offer non-prescriptive
procedures to reduce fatigue further by addressing the complexity of aviation operations and
fatigue challenges associated with aviation operations. FRMSs are inherently evidence-based and
include a combination of processes and procedures that are employed for the measurement,
mitigation, management, and monitoring of fatigue risk within a specific operational setting 80.
Fatigue risk management programs provide an interactive and collaborative approach to address
performance and safety levels of operations on a case-by-case basis, and, therefore, are more
adaptive to the specific conditions that create fatigue in a particular operational environment.
(2) An FRMS employs a multi-layered defense to proactively manage operational fatigue
risk. The defenses against fatigue risk can include the following levels of intervention:
(a) Flight and duty time scheduling,
(b) Employee training and individual sleep practices and hygiene,
(c) Teamwork and crew resource management, and
(d) Procedural and flight system barriers to error.
b. FRMS Applicability. An FRMS can be used within the envelope of prescriptive flight
and duty time limitations or as an alternative to such prescriptive rules if it provides at least an
equivalent level of safety. An FRMS enhances the capability of prescriptive flight and duty time
Par 13 Page 19
AC 120-100 06/07/10
limitations to provide an equivalent or enhanced level of safety based upon the identification and
management of fatigue risk relevant to the specific circumstances. Use of an FRMS can allow
greater operational flexibility and efficiency while maintaining safety by relying on in-flight
measurements of sleep and alertness, including subjective reports by crewmembers, to monitor
how scheduling affects flight and cabin crew alertness during flight duty.
(1) Commercially available computer models can be used to predict average performance
capability from sleep/wake history and normal circadian rhythms. Models embedded within the
FRMS process can help operators understand the likely effects on performance of sleep obtained
before and during trip patterns. Such models, though not required, encapsulate the latest
scientific research on human circadian systems, sleep, and performance capability and can be
useful for rapidly estimating the likely fatigue levels associated with proposed new routes or
schedule changes. However, certain assumptions and limitations need to be taken into account.
They represent one useful component of an FRMS, but are not a substitute for an FRMS.
(2) An effective FRMS is data-driven and routinely collects and analyzes information
and reports related to crew alertness as well as operational flight performance data. An FRMS’s
comprehensive range of safeguards helps to control the risk associated with both transient and
cumulative fatigue. An FRMS based upon scientific principles and knowledge combined with
sound methods of data collection and analysis can help maintain an equivalent level of safety
while allowing greater operational flexibility.
c. FRMS as Part of a Safety Management System (SMS). Ideally, an FRMS should be an
integral part of an operator’s established SMS and its capability should be commensurate with
the risk oversight needs. Whether within an existing SMS or as a stand-alone system, an FRMS
applies SMS principles to proactively and continuously manage fatigue risk through a process
requiring shared responsibility among management and flight and cabin crewmembers. Since
feedback and non-punitive reporting from employees are essential elements of an SMS, a “just
culture” is integral to any FRMS program. When properly implemented, an FRMS is a
continuous performance improvement process, using feedback on the success or limitations of
prior scheduling and fatigue mitigations to suggest improvements for future scheduling and
fatigue mitigations.
d. Benefits of FRMS. Aviation carriers, regulators, and groups worldwide are addressing
the benefits of incorporating FRMS programs into current aviation operations. Recent examples
include easyJet, Air New Zealand, United Airlines, Continental Airlines, the Australia Civil
Aviation Safety Authority, the Flight Safety Foundation, and the International Civil Aviation
Organization (ICAO). Preliminary data from easyJet’s FRMS program have demonstrated its
effectiveness in reducing fatigue 82. Air New Zealand has been a leader in demonstrating the
operational benefits of an FRMS as presented at the FAA Symposium, “Aviation Fatigue
Management Symposium: Partnerships for Solutions” on June 17—19, 2008 in Vienna, Virginia.
Based on the available research and demonstrated success of such programs, the FAA is
exploring ways to implement effective FRMS-based programs in operations where fatigue has
been identified as an inherent risk. An FRMS offers a way to conduct safer flights beyond
existing regulatory limits and is a promising addition to prescriptive flight and duty time and rest
period regulations.
Page 20 Par 14
06/07/10 AC 120-100
ORIGINAL SIGNED by
Raymond Towles for
John M. Allen
Director, Flight Standards Service
Par 4 Page 21
06/07/10 AC 120-100
Appendix 1
APPENDIX 1. REFERENCES
(1) Achermann, P. The two-process model of sleep regulation revisited. Aviation,
Space, and Environmental Medicine, 2004, 75 (3 Suppl): A37-43.
(2) Angus, R. G.; Pigeau, R. A.; Heslegrave, R. J. Sustained-operations studies: from
the field to the laboratory. In: Stampi, C.; ed. Why we nap. Birkhauser; Boston; 1992: 217-41.
(3) Belenky, G.; Wesensten, N. J.; Thorne, D. R.; Thomas, M. L.;, Sing, H. C.;
Redmond, D. P.; et al. Patterns of performance degradation and restoration during sleep
restriction and subsequent recovery: a sleep dose-response study. Journal of Sleep Research,
2003; 12: 1-12.
(4) Bonnet, M. H. Dealing with shift work: physical fitness, temperature, and napping.
Work & Stress, 1990, 4: 261-74.
(5) Bonnet, M. H. The effect of varying prophylactic naps on performance, alertness,
and mood throughout a 52-hour continuous operation. Sleep, 1991, 14: 307-15.
(6) Bonnet, M. H. Sleep Deprivation. In M. H. Kryger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement
(Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep medicine (3rd ed). Philadelphia: Saunders; 2000: 53-71.
(7) Bonnet, M. H. Acute sleep deprivation. In: Kryger, M. A.; Roth, T.; Dement, W. C.;
eds. Principles and practice of sleep medicine. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2005: 51-66.
(8) Bonnet, M. H.; Balkin, T. J.; Dinges, D. F.; Roehrs, T.; Rogers, N. L.; Wesensten,
N. J. The use of stimulants to modify performance during sleep loss: A review by the Sleep
Deprivation and Stimulant Task Force of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine. Sleep 2005;
28(9): 1163-87.
(9) Borbély, A. A. A two-process model of sleep regulation. Hum Neurobiol, 1982;
1(3): 195-204.
(10) Borbely, A. A.; Achermann, P. Concepts and models of sleep regulation: an
overview. Journal of Sleep Research, 1992, 1 (2): 63-79.
(11) Bourgeois-Bougrine, S.; Carbon, P.; Gounelle, C.; Mollard, R.; Coblentz, A.
Perceived fatigue for short- and long-haul flights: a survey of 739 airline pilots. Aviat Space
Environ Med 2003, 74: 1072-7.
(12) Boulos, Z.; Campbell, S, S.; Lewy, A. J.; Terman, M.; Dijk, D. J.; and Eastman, C.
I. Light treatment for sleep disorders: consensus report. VII. Jet lag. J Biol Rhythms 1995, 10(2):
167-76.
(13) Cabon, P.; Coblentz, A.; Mollard, R.; Fouillot, J. P. Human vigilance in railway and
long-haul flight operation. Ergonomics 1993, 36: 1019-33.
Page 1
AC 120-100 06/07/10
Appendix 1
(14) Cajochen, C.; Zeitzer, J. M.; Czeisler, C. A.; & Dijk, D. J. Dose response
relationship for light intensity and ocular and electroencephalographic correlates of human
alertness. Behav Brain Res 2000; 115: 75-83.
(15) Caldwell, J. A.; Mallis, M. M.; Colletti, L. M.; Oyung, R. L.; Brandt, S. L.;
Arsintescu, L.; DeRoshia, C. W.; Reduta-Rojas, D. D.; Chapman, P. M. The effects of
ultra-long-range flights on the alertness and performance of aviators (NASA Technical
Memorandum 2006-213484), Moffett Field, CA: NASA Ames Research Center.
(16) Caldwell, J. A.; Mallis, M. M.; Caldwell, J. L.; Michel, A. P.; Miller, J. C.; Neri, D.
F. Fatigue Countermeasures in Aviation. Aviat Space Environ Med 2009; 80(1): 29-59.
(17) Carskadon, M. A. Ontogeny of human sleepiness as measured by sleep latency. In:
Dinges DF, Broughton RJ, eds. Sleep and alertness: chronobiological, behavioral, and medical
aspects of napping. New York: Raven Press; 1989: 53-69.
(18) Carskadon, M. A.; Dement, W. C. (1987). Daytime sleepiness: quantification of a
behavioral state. Neuroscience Biobehavioral Review 1987, 11: 307-17.
(19) Carskadon, M. A.; Roth, T. Sleep Restriction. In T. H. Monk (Ed.), Sleep,
Sleepiness and Performance. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 1991: 155-67.
(20) Co, E. L.; Gregory, K. B.; Johnson, J. M.; & Rosekind, M. R. Crew factors in flight
operations XI: A survey of fatigue factors in regional airline operations. Moffett Field, CA:
NASA Ames Research Center; 1999. Report No: NASA/TM—1999 - 208799.
(21) Czeisler, C. A.; Duffy, J. F.; Shanahan, T. L.; Brown, E. N.; Mitchell, J. F.;
Rimmer, D. W.; et al. Stability, precision, and near-24-hour period of the human circadian
pacemaker. Science 1999, 284: 2177-81.
(22) DeRoshia, C. W.; & Greenleaf, J. E. Performance and mood state parameters during
30-day 6° head-down bed rest with exercise training. Aviat, Space Environ Med 1993, 64: 522-7.
(23) Dijk, D. J. & Czeisler, C.A. Contribution of the circadian pacemaker and the sleep
homeostat to sleep propensity, sleep structure, electroencephalographic slow waves, and sleep
spindle activity in humans. Journal of Neuroscience 1995, 15: 3526-38.
(24) Dijk, D. J.; Franken, P. Interaction of sleep homeostasis and circadian rhythmicity:
dependent or independent systems? In: Kryger, M. A.; Roth, T.; Dement, W. C.; eds. Principles
and practice of sleep medicine. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2005: 418-34.
(25) Dijkman, M.; Sachs, N.; Levine, E.; Mallis, M.; Carlin, M. M.; Gillen, K. A.; et al.
Effects of reduced stimulation on neurobehavioral alertness depend on circadian phase during
human sleep deprivation. Sleep Res 1997; 26: 265.
(26) Dinges D. F. Differential effects of prior wakefulness and circadian phase on nap
sleep. Electroen Clin Neuro 1986, 64: 224-7.
Page 2
06/07/10 AC 120-100
Appendix 1
(27) Dinges, D. F. The nature of sleepiness: Causes, contexts and consequences. In A.
Stunkard & A. Baum (Eds.), Perspectives in behavioral medicine: Eating, sleeping and sex.
Hillsdale, NJ; 1989: Lawrence Erlbaum.
(28) Dinges, D. F. Napping patterns and effects in human adults. Sleep and alertness:
Chronobiological, behavioral, and medical aspects of napping. D. F. Dinges and R. J. Broughton.
New York, Raven Press: 1989: 171-204.
(29) Dinges, D. F. Probing the limits of functional capability: the effects of sleep loss on
short-duration tasks. In R. J. Broughton & R. D. Ogilvie (Eds.), Sleep, arousal, and performance.
Boston: Birkhauser, 1992: 177-88.
(30) Dinges, D. F. Critical research issues in development of biomathematical models of
fatigue and performance. Aviation, Space and Environmental Medicine 2004; 75(3): A181-91.
(31) Dinges, D. F.; Graeber, R. C.; Rosekind, M. R.; Samel, A.; Wegmann, H, M.
Principles and guidelines for duty and rest scheduling in commercial aviation. Moffett Field, CA:
NASA Ames Research Center; 1996. Report No: 110404.
(32) Dinges, D. F.; & Kribbs, N. B. Performing while sleepy: effects of
experimentally-induced sleepiness. In T. Monk (Ed.), Sleep, Sleepiness, and Performance.
Chichester, UK: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd; 1991: 98-128.
(33) Dinges, D. F.; & Mallis, M. M. Managing fatigue by drowsiness detection: Can
technological promises be realized? In L. Hartley (Ed.), Managing Fatigue in Transportation.
Oxford: Pergamon; 1998: 209-29.
(34) Dinges, D. F.; Pack, F.; Williams, K.; Gillen, K. A.; Powell, J. W.; Ott, G. E.; et al.
Cumulative sleepiness, mood disturbance, and psychomotor vigilance performance decrements
during a week of sleep restricted to 4-5 hours per night. Sleep 1997; 20(4): 267-77.
(35) Dinges, D. F.; Whitehouse, W. G.;, Orne, E. C.; Orne, M. T. The benefits of a nap
during prolonged work and wakefulness. Work Stress 1988, 2: 139-53.
(36) Duffy, J. F.; Rimmer, D. W.; Czeisler, C. A. Association of intrinsic circadian
period with morningness-eveningness, usual wake time, and circadian phase. Behavioral
Neuroscience Aug 2001; 115(4): 895-99.
(37) Flight Safety Foundation. Lessons from the dawn of ultra-long-range flight. Flight
Safety Digest 2005 Aug-Sept: 1-60.
(38) Folkard, S.; Monk, T. H.; Lobuan, M. C. (1979). Towards a predictive test of
adjustment to shift work. Ergonomics 1979; 1366-5847, 22(1): 79-91.
(39) Folkard, S.; Tucker, P. Shift work, safety and productivity. Occup Med 2003; 53:
95-101.
Page 3
AC 120-100 06/07/10
Appendix 1
(40) Galinsky, T.; Swanson, N.; Sauter, S.; Dunkin, R.; Hurrell, J.; Schleifer, L.
Supplementary breaks and stretching exercises for data entry operators: a follow-up field study.
Am J Ind Med 2007, 50: 519-27.
(41) Gander, P. H.; Gregory, K. B.; Miller, D. L.; Graeber, R. C.; Connell, L. J.;
Rosekind, M. R. (1998b). Flightcrew fatigue V: long-haul air transport operations. Aviat Space
Environ Med 1998b; 69(9 Suppl): B37-48.
(42) Goldsmith, C. More carriers sanction their pilots’ cockpit snoozes. The Wall Street
Journal 1998 Jan 21, B1.
(43) Hall, E. F.; Duffy, J. F.; Dijk, D. J.; Czeisler, C. A. Interval between waketime and
circadian phase differences between morning and evening types. Sleep Res 1997; 26: 716.
(44) Haslam, D. D. The military performance of soldiers in sustained operations. Aviat
Space Environ Med 1984, 55(3): 216-21.
(45) Heslegrave, R. J.; Angus, R. G. The effects of task duration and work-session
location on performance degradation induced by sleep loss and sustained cognitive work. Behav
Res Methods Inst Comput 1985, 17: 592-603.
(46) Ho, P.; Landsberger, S.; Signal, L.; Singh, J.; Stone, B. The Singapore experience:
task force studies scientific data to assess flights. Flight Safety Digest 2005; 24(8-9): 20-40.
(47) Horne, J. A. Human sleep, sleep loss and behaviour: implications for prefrontal
cortex and psychiatric disorder. British Journal of Psychiatry 1993, 162: 413-9.
(48) Horne, J. A.; Ostberg, O. A self-assessment questionnaire to determine
morningness-eveningness in human circadian rhythms. International Journal of Chronobiology
1976, 4(2): 97-110.
(49) Horne, J. A.; Reyner, L. A. Sleep related vehicle accidents. Br Med Journal 1985,
310: 565-7.
(50) Hursh, S. R.; Raslear, T. G.; Kaye, S. A.; Fanzone, J. F., Jr. Validation and
calibration of a fatigue assessment tool for railroad work schedules, summary report,
DOT/FRA/ORD-06/21, October 31, 2006.
(51) Kellar, E. E. The effects of exposure to bright light on cognitive performance.
Unpublished Masters Thesis, San Jose State University, San Jose, CA 1992.
(52) Kerkhof, G. A.; Van Dongen, H. P. A. Morning-type and evening-type individuals
differ in phase position of their endogenous circadian oscillator. Neuroscience Letters 1996; 218:
153-6.
(53) Klein, K. E.; Wegmann, H. M. Significance of circadian rhythms in aerospace
operations. France, Neuilly-Sur-Seine; 1980.
Page 4
06/07/10 AC 120-100
Appendix 1
(54) Lavie, P. Ultrashort sleep-waking schedule. III. “Gates” and “forbidden zones” for
sleep. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol 1986; 63: 414-25.
(55) Lavie, P. Sleep habits and sleep disturbances in industrial workers in Israel: main
findings and some characteristics of workers complaining of excessive daytime sleepiness. Sleep
1981; 4(2): 147-58.
(56) Lockley, S. W.; Evans, E. E.; Scheer, F. A.; Brainard, G. C.; Czeisler, C. A.; &
Aeschbach, D. Short-wavelength sensitivity for the direct effects of light on alertness, vigilance,
and the waking electroencephalogram in humans. Sleep 2006; 29: 161-8.
(57) Lowden, A.; Akerstedt, T. Retaining home-base sleep hours to prevent jet lag in
connection with a westward flight across nine time zones. Chronobiology International 1998;
15(4): 365-76.
(58) Mallis, M. M., & Dinges, D. F. Monitoring Alertness and Drowsiness On-line,
Real-time (Chapter 25). In N. Stanton, A. Hedge, K. Brookhuis, E. Salas, H. Hendrick, (Eds.),
The handbook of human factors and ergonomics methods. New York: CRC Press; 2005; 25: 1-6
(59) Mallis, M. M.; Mejdal, S.; Nguyen, T. T.; Dinges, D. F. Summary of the key
features of seven biomathematical models of human fatigue and performance. Aviat Space
Environ Med 2004; 75(3 Suppl): A4-14.
(60) Matsumoto, K.; Harada, M. The effect of night-time naps on recovery from fatigue
following night work. Ergonomics 1994, 37: 899-907.
(61) Matsumoto, Y.; Mishima, K.; Satoh, K.; Shimizu, T.; Hishikawa, Y. Physical
activity increases the dissociation between subjective sleepiness and objective performance
levels during extended wakefulness in human. Neurosci Lett 2002; 326: 133-6.
(62) Mitler, M. M.; Carskadon, M. A.; Czeisler, C. A.; Dement, W. C.; Dinges, D. F.;
Graeber, R. C. Catastrophes, sleep and public policy: consensus report. Sleep 1988; 11(1):
100-09.
(63) Mollicone, D. J.; Van Dongen, H. P. A.; Rogers, N. L.; Dinges, D. F. Response
surface mapping of neurobehavioral performance: testing the feasibility of split sleep schedules
for space operations. Acta Astronautica 2008; 63(7-10): 833-40.
(64) Moore, R. Y. A clock for the ages. Science 1999; 284: 2102-03.
(65) Naitoh, P. Sleep deprivation in humans. In P. H. Venables & M. J. Christie (Eds.),
Research in psychophysiology. London: John Wiley; 1975.
(66) National Sleep Foundation. 2002 Sleep in America Poll. Available at: http:
//www.sleepfoundation.org/product/nsf-2002-sleep-america-poll. Accessed August 15, 2005.
Page 5
AC 120-100 06/07/10
Appendix 1
(67) National Transportation Safety Board. A review of flightcrew-involved, major
accidents of U.S. air carriers, 1978 through 1990. Washington: National Transportation Safety
Board; 1994. Report No: NTSB Safety Study No. SS-94-01.
(68) Neri, D. F.; Oyung, R. L.; Colletti, L. M.; Mallis, M. M.; Tam, P. Y.; Dinges, D. F.
Controlled breaks as a fatigue countermeasure on the flight deck. Aviat Space Environ Med
2002, 73: 654-64.
(69) Powell, D. M. C.; Spencer, M. B.; Holland, D.; Broadbent, E.; Petrie, K. J. Pilot
fatigue in short-haul operations: Effects of number of sectors, duty length, and time of day. Aviat
Space Environ Med 2007, 78(7): 698-701.
(70) Roach, G. D.; Rodgers, M.; Dawson, D. Circadian adaptation of aircrew to
transmeridian flight. Aviat Space Environ Med 2002; 73(12): 1153-60.
(71) Rogers, A. S.; Spencer, M. B.; Stone, B. M.; Nicholson, A. N. The influence of a 1
h nap on performance overnight. Ergonomics 1989; 32: 1193-205.
(72) Rosa, R. R. Napping at home and alertness on the job in rotating shift workers.
Sleep 1993; 16: 727-35.
(73) Rosekind, M. R.; Co, E. L.; Gregory, K. B.; Miller, D. L. Crew factors in flight
operations XIII: a survey of fatigue factors in corporate/executive aviation operations. Moffett
Field, CA: NASA Ames Research Center; 2000. Report No.: NASA/TM–2000–209610.
(74) Rosekind, M. R.; Graeber, R. C.; Dinges, D. F.; Connell, L. J.; Rountree, M. S.;
Spinweber, C. L.; et al. Crew factors in flight operations IX: effects of planned cockpit rest on
crew performance and alertness in long-haul operations. Moffett Field, CA: NASA Ames
Research Center; 1994 Report No: DOT/FAA/92/24.
(75) Rosekind, M. R.; Miller, D. L.; Gregory, K. B.; Dinges, D. F. Crew factors in flight
operations XII: a survey of sleep quantity and quality in on-board crew rest facilities. Moffett
Field, CA: NASA; 2000 Report No: NASA/TM-2000-20961.
(76) Sack, R. L.; Auckley, D.; Auger, R. R.; Carskadon, M. A.; Wright, K. P., Jr.;
Vitiello, M. V.; Zhdanova, I. V. Circadian rhythm sleep disorders: Part I, basic principles, shift
work and jet lag disorders. An American Academy of Sleep Medicine review. Sleep 2007,
30(11): 1460-83.
(77) Samel, A.; Wegmann, H. M.; Vejvoda, M. Aircrew fatigue in long-haul operations.
Accident Analysis and Prevention 1997, 29: 439-52.
(78) Santhi, N.; Aeschbach, D.; Horowitz, T. S.; Czeisler, C. A. The impact of sleep
timing and bright light exposure on attentional impairment during night work. J Biol Rhythms
2008; 23(4): 341-52.
(79) Signal, L.; Gander, P.; van den Berg, M. Sleep during ultra-long range flights: a
study of sleep on board the 777-200 ER during rest opportunities of 7 hours. Report Published
Page 6
06/07/10 AC 120-100
Appendix 1
for the Boeing Commercial Airplane Group Sleep/Wake Research Centre, Massey University.
Wellington, New Zealand; 2003.
(80) Signal, L.; Ratieta, D.; Gander P. Fatigue management in the New Zealand aviation
industry, Australian Transport Safety Bureau Research and Analysis Report; 2006.
(81) Spurgeon, A. Working time: its impact on safety and health. International Labour
Office Report. Geneva: International Labour Organization; 2003.
(82) Stewart, S. An integrated system for managing fatigue risk within a low cost carrier.
59th International Aviation Safety Seminar (IASS), Paris, France; 2006.
(83) Tucker, P.; Folkard, S.; Macdonald I. Rest breaks and accident risk. Lancet 2003;
361(9358): 680.
(84) US Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. Workers on Flexible and Shift
Schedules in 2004 Summary. Available at: http: //www.bls.gov/news.release/flex.nr0.htm.
Accessed August 15, 2005.
(85) Van Dongen, H. P. A.; Dinges, D. F. Circadian rhythms in fatigue, alertness, and
performance. In M. H. Kyyger, T. Roth, & W. C. Dement (Eds.), Principles and practice of sleep
medicine. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders; 2000: 391-99.
(86) Van Dongen, H. P. A.; Dinges, D. F. Sleep, circadian rhythms, and psychomotor
vigilance. Clin Sports Med 2005; 24: 237-49, vii-viii.
(87) Van Dongen, H. P. A.; Maislin, G.; Mullington, J. M.; Dinges, D. F. The cumulative
cost of additional wakefulness: Dose-response effects on neurobehavioral functions and sleep
physiology from chronic sleep restriction and total sleep deprivation. Sleep 2003; 26(2): 117-26.
(88) Van Dongen, H. P. A.; Price, N. J.; Mullington, J. M.; Szuba, M. P.; Kapoor, S. C,;
Dinges, D. F. Caffeine eliminates psychomotor vigilance deficits from sleep inertia. Sleep 2001;
24(7): 813-19.
(89) Vgontzas, A. N.; Pejovic, S.; Zoumakis, E.; Lin, H.M.; Bixler, E. O.; Basta, M.; et
al. Daytime napping after a night of sleep loss decreases sleepiness, improves performance, and
causes beneficial changes in cortisol and interleukin-6 secretion. American Journal of
Physiology—Endocrinology and Metabolism 2007, 292: E253-61.
(90) Voigt, E. D.; Engel, P.; Klein, H. Über den Tagesgang der körperlichen
Leistungsfähigkeit. Internationale Zeitschrift für angewandte Physiologie einschliesslich
Arbeitsphysiologie, 1968, 25: 1-12.
(91) Webb, W. The proximal effects of two and four hour naps within extended
performance without sleep. Psychophysiology, 1987; 24: 426-9.
(92) Webb, W. B.; Agnew, H.W. Sleep: effects of a restricted regime. Science, 1965,
150: 1745-7.
Page 7
AC 120-100 06/07/10
Appendix 1
(93) Wesensten, N. J.; Killgore, W. D. S.; Balkin, T. J. Performance and alertness effects
of caffeine, dextroamphetamine, and modafinil during sleep deprivation. Journal of Sleep
Research, 2005, 14: 255-266.
(94) Wright, N.; McGown, A. Vigilance on the civil flight deck: incidence of sleepiness
and sleep during long-haul flights and associated changes in physiological parameters.
Ergonomics, 2001; 44: 82-106.
(95) Wylie, C. D.; Shultz, T.; Miller, J. C.; Mitler, M. M.; Mackie, R. R. Commercial
Motor Vehicle Driver Fatigue and Alertness Study: Project Report (Report No.:
FHWA-MC-97-002). Washington: U.S. Department of Transportation; 1996.
Page 8
