Advisory
Circular
Subject: Date: 219196 AcNO:l20-5OA
Initiated by: AFS-2 10 cha#@e:
GUIDELINES FOR OPERATIONAL
APPROVAL OF WINDSHEAR TRAINING
PROGRAMS
1 PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC) provides guidance for
approval of low-altitude windshear training for operations under
Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) parts 121 and
135. Compliance with these guidelines is not, in itself,
mandatory and does not constitute a regulation. This AC is
issued for guidance purposes to outline a method of compliance
with the regulations. An applicant may elect to follow an
alternate method, provided that alternate method is found
acceptable by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
AC 120-50, Guidelines for Operational
2 CANCELLATION
l
Approval of Windshear Training Programs, dated 10/10/89, is
canceled.
3 DEFINITIONS. The following definitions apply for purposes
of this advisory circular only:
a. Turbine-Powered Airplanes. The definition includes
turbofan, turbojet, prop fan, and ultra-high-bypass fan-powered
airplanes; but, specifically excludes turbopropeller-powered
airplanes equipped with variable pitch, constant speed
propellers.
b Windshear Escape Maneuver. A pilot recovery technique
used when an inadvertent windshear encounter is experienced. It
is achieved by pitching toward an initial target attitude while
using necessary thrust to effect escape. The objective of the
recovery technique is to keep the airplane flying as long as
possible in hope of exiting the windshear. The maneuver is an
operational technique to be used to escape from an encounter with
windshear. It was specifically developed to be effective,
simple, and easily remembered by the crewmembers. The maneuver
should also have general applicability.
4 FOCUS. The guidance in this AC is applicable to operators
subject to the training and qualification requirements of
parts 121 and/or 135.
FAA Form 132045 (4-82) Supersedes WA Form 132Ck2
AC 120050A 219196
5 RELATED MATERIALS. A two-volume Windshear Training Aid
publication, which includes an "Example Windshear Training
Program,“ may be purchased from the National Technical
Information Service (NTIS)# 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield,
Virginia, 22161, telephone (703) 48704650. Volume I's order
number is PB88127196, and Volume II's is PB88127204. A
multimedia package is also available. Ask for "The Windshear
Training Package/ order number AVAl9756KKOO.
6 BACKGROUND.
l
a. National Transportation Safety Board investigations
have shown that low-altitude windshear has been a prime cause of
air carrier accidents.
b In 1985, the FAA contracted with a consortium of
aviation specialists from The Boeing Company, United Airlines,
McDonnell Douglas, Lockheed-California, Aviation Weather
Associates, and Helliwell, Inc., to produce a windshear training
aid to enhance a pilot's understanding of windshear. The
resulting Windshear Training Aid consists of documents, slides, a
compact disc, and video tapes designed to present effective
training for flightcrews in order to minimize the windshear
threat.
c. The consortium of aviation specialists who developed
this uniform, industry-wide Windshear Training Aid focused on the
cause and effect of windshear and developed instructions for
windshear identification, avoidance, and recovery. This
information provides any operator with the necessary data to
create or update its own windshear training program.
d There is a clear and independent need for effective
windshear training. For this reason, windshear training
requirements were established in 14 CFR parts 121 and 135,
Amendment Numbers 121-199 and 135-27, which were issued on
September 27, 1988. Section 121.404 states in part that after
January 2, 1991, no certificate holder may use a person as a
flight crewmember unless that person has completed windshear
ground training in accordance with section 121.419 and windshear
flight training, if applicable, in accordance with
sections 121.409, 121.424, and 121.427. Section
135.345(b)(6)(ii), in part, states that initial, transition, and
upgrade ground training for pilots must include instruction in
the knowledge and procedures needed to escape from severe weather
situations, including low-altitude windshear. Section 135.351
requires recurrent training and instruction as necessary in the
subjects required for initial ground training, including the low-
altitude windshear training prescribed in section 135.341 and
described by section 135.345.
Page 2 Par 5
219196 AC 120-5OA
7 . APPROVAL PROCESS.
a. Overall approval for a windshear training program will
rest with the principal operations inspector (POI) assigned to
each certificate holder. Certificate holders can use the
"Example Windshear Training Program" section of the Windshear
Training Aid. It is an example of a typical windshear training
program. The checklists in the appendices can be used as a guide
for training program approval.
b Operators of those aircraft that were not included in
the original Windshear Training Aid are encouraged to develop
their windshear training programs to reflect necessary aircraft
specific differences. Windshear training programs that include
recovery techniques different from those presented in the
Windshear Training Aid are acceptable as long as they are based
on reliable engineering data. This data will normally be
supplied by an aircraft manufacturer or other sources considered
reliable by the FAA.
8 0 GROUND TRAINING PROGRAM.
a. General Training Objectives.
(1) Reduce windshear related accidents and incidents
through flight crewmember education; and
(2) Stress the importance of windshear avoidance to
flightcrews.
b Specific Training Objectives. Provide pilots with the
knowleiges needed to:
m Identify the actual or potential presence of
windshear from a variety of information sources and cues.
(2) Adhere to a policy of avoiding, whenever possible,
encounters with windshear.
(3) Adhere to a policy that when executing a missed
approach or go-around in weather conditions conducive to
windshear that the missed approach or go-around be conducted in
an aggressive manner, and the flightcrew is ready to accomplish
windshear escape procedures should an ensuing windshear be
encountered.
(4) Use operating procedures and techniques designed
to enhance the possibility of surviving an inadvertent encounter
with windshear during takeoff, approach, or landing.
Par 7 Page 3
AC 120-50A
219196
w
Identify unique stall characteristics and
windshear recovery techniques that are specific to the aircraft
type. Special attention should be given to low airspeed lateral
control characteristics, loss of climb capability, unique
windshear characteristics, windshear flight guidance system
limitations, etc.
NOTE: See the Windshear Training Aid for an example of an
acceptable ground training curriculum.
9 FLIGHT SIMULATOR TRAINING. Flight Simulator Training is
required for part 121 operators of turbine-powered airplanes and
is recommended for part 135 operators. It primarily addresses
the second major goal of windshear pilot training-windshear
recovery techniques. Training and practice will be provided in
critical pilot functions, which include operational precautions,
use of standard operating techniques (to improve cockpit
recognition of a windshear encounter), and the recommended
recovery techniques for inadvertent windshear encounters. The
following applies:
a. Flight Simulator Training Objectives. The training
objectives of the simulator training program will be to provide
pilots with the necessary experience and skills to:
(1) Recognize onset of a severe windshear encounter
using available flight instrumentation.
(2) Coordinate cockpit activities to improve the
pilot's ability to recognize and take the appropriate actions to
recover from an inadvertent windshear encounter.
(3) Make proper use of pitch, power, and airplane
configuration to recover from an inadvertent windshear encounter.
b Simulator Equipment.
l
(1) Flight simulators used-for windshear training will
be specifically qualified for that purpose by the National
Simulator Program Manager (NSPM), AFS-205. Only then can the
simulator be approved by the PO1 for use in a windshear training
curriculum. (Refer to the current edition of AC 120-40, Airplane
Simulator and Visual System Evaluation).
(2) The simulator used for windshear training will be
equipped with windshear avionics operationally equivalent to that
which is in the type of aircraft the pilot will fly. Such
equipment may be actual aircraft-type hardware, or a simulation
Page 4 Par 8
AC 120-5OA
219196
thereof, which presents to the pilot an accurate replication of
displays and aural warnings.
NOTE: See paragraph 9(d)(5) for predictive windshear
simulator avionics equipment.
c. Training Plan.
(1) An operator's training plan will define the
windshear avionics equipment in its flight simulators. All
pilots, who operate aircraft in part 121 operations, must receive
flight simulator training on windshear techniques and procedures7
(2) Training must ensure that pilots know how to
operate the windshear avionics equipment.
(3) All flight simulators used by the operator for
windshear training will be equipped with windshear equipment that
is operationally equivalent to that which is in the aircraft the
pilot will fly.
w Flight training, for the purpose of compliance, is
considered complete when all the basic windshear escape maneuvers
have been trained in the simulator.
d 0 Flight Simulator Curriculum.
(1) Pilots should be thoroughly familiar with the
material contained in the ground training program prior to flight
simulator windshear training.
(2) A flight simulator training program (other than
recurrent) should include at least one encounter in each of the
following three phases of flight. Recurrent training should
include at least one of the following on a rotating basis during
successive training periods:
bl Takeoff prior to Vr.
@I Takeoff after Vr.
kl On approach.
(3 The pilot should be trained in the proper
windshear recognition criteria and crew coordination and the
correct use of pitch, power, and airplane configuration to
control flightpath.
(41 The training scenarios should have windshear
encounters of sufficient severity to allow the pilot an
Par 9 Page 5
AC 120-5OA
2/9/96
opportunity to develop windshear recognition skills as well as
recovery procedures. In addition to windshear training scenarios
containing environmental conditions conducive to windshear such
as turbulence, heavy precipitation, rapidly changing airspeed,
etc., windshear training scenarios should also be offered in
which no turbulence or rapid airspeed changes are presented.
Actual windshear events have occurred where turbulence was
absent.
(5) Predictive windshear flight simulator training is
needed for pilots who operate aircraft equipped with predictive
windshear detection. Currently, predictive windshear avionics
are unique in that no flight command guidance is provided.
Some,
but not all, predictive windshear avionics should be installed in
simulators used in predictiv e windshear training programs. The
total predictive windshear avionics package need not be installed
in the simulator; however, simulators used in predictive
windshear training programs must be qualified for that purpose by
the NSPM and have predictive windshear alerting systems installed
(aural and visual caution alerts). Flight simulator training
should be conducted using generic windshear escape procedures
identified in paragraph 9(d)(2)(a, b, and c).
WI If more than one type of windshear equipment is,
installed on the aircraft fleet that a pilot will fly, the
training program should include specific training on each type of
windshear equipment. This should be in the form of flight
simulator training for, at least, one type of windshear
equipment, and "differences" training (videos, bulletins,
classroom lecture, etc.) on the other types of installed
windshear equipment.
10 PART 135 OPERATORSN OT REQUIRED TO HAVE A TRAINING PROGRAM.
Section 135.341(a) states that certificate holders who use only
one pilot in their operation are not required to establish and
maintain an approved pilot training program. Pilots of such
certificate holders are responsible for knowing the factors
associated with windshear including weather conditions conducive
to windshear, the importance of avoiding such conditions, and the
proper windshear escape maneuver for aircraft they operate.
See section 135.293(a).
William J. White
Deputy Director, Flight Standards Service
Page 6
Par 9
219196 AC 120-50A
Appendix 1
APPENDIX 1. CHECKLIST (PART 121 OPERATORS)
1 Does the certificate holder operate turbine-powered
l
airplanes?
2 Does the certificate holder perform its windshear
FLIGHT training requirements in a qualified flight simulator?
3 Does the certificate holder include the windshear
FLIGHT training program in each of the flight crewmember FLIGHT
training programs listed below?
a. Initial, Transition, and Upgrade flight training.
b 0 Recurrent flight training.
c. Differences training (if appropriate).
4 Does the certificate holder perform its windshear
fiight training requirements in an approved flight simulator for
each airplane type the holder operates?
5 Does the Initial, Transition, and Upgrade GROUND
training for pilots and flight engineers include procedures
listed below?
a. Procedures for recognizing and avoiding severe
weather situations.
b Procedures for escaping from severe weather
l
situations in case of an inadvertent encounter, including low-
altitude windshear.
6 Is windshear flight training (in an approved
simulator) conducted during both recurrent training periods and
proficiency checks?
Page 1 (and 2)
2/9/96 AC 12005OA
Appendix 2
APPENDIX 2. CHECKLIST (PART 135 OPERATORS)
1 Does the certificate holder include in its initial and
recurrent pilot oral testing requirements procedures listed
below?
a. Procedures for recognizing and avoiding severe
weather situations.
b 0 Procedures for escaping from severe weather
situations in case of an inadvertent encounter, including low-
altitude windshear (rotorcraft pilots are not required to be
tested on escaping from low-altitude windshear).
c. Procedures for operating in or near thunderstorms
(including best penetrating altitudes), turbulent air (including
clear air turbulence), icing, hail, and other potentially
hazardous meteorological conditions.
2 Does the certificate holder include in its initial,
tiansition, and upgrade ground training the procedures listed
below?
a. Procedures for recognizing and avoiding severe
weather conditions.
b Procedures for escaping from severe weather
l
situations in case of an inadvertent encounter, including low-
altitude windshear (rotorcraft pilots are not required to be
trained in escaping from low-altitude windshear).
c. Procedures for operating in or near thunderstorms
(including best penetrating altitudes), turbulent air (including
clear air turbulence), icing, hail, and other potentially
hazardous meteorological conditions.
3 It is recommended, although not required, that if the
krtificate holder has access to a flight simulator, that
windshear recovery training be given in a flight simulator.
Page 1 (and 2) *
U.SD. epartment
of ltansportation BULK MAk
POSTAGE 4% FEES PA10
Federal Aviation FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTFIATION
Adminis?rution
PERMIT NO. G-44
800 Independence Ave., S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20591
FORWARDING AND REtURN
POSTAGE GUARANTEED
Official Business
Penalty for Private Use $300
