Advisory
U.S.D efxlmmt Circular
of Wanspoctation
FMHdAvktkn
AdmMsttatkrr
subjm: MAINTENANCE RECORDS D91t: 6/8/98 AC No: 43-9<3
Initintcd by: AFS-340 Change:
1. PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC) describesm ethods, procedures and practices that
have been determined to be acceptablem eans of showing compliance with the general aviation
maintenance record making and record keeping requirements of Title 14 of the Code of
Federal Regulations ( 14 CFR) parts 43 and 9 1. This material is not mandatory, nor is it
reg]ulatory and acknowledges that the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) will consider
other methods that may be presented. It is issued for guidance purposes and outlines several
methods of compliance with the regulations.
NOTE: The information in this AC does not apply to air carrier maintenance
records made and retained in accordance with 14 CFR part 121.
2. CANCELLATION. AC 43-9B, Maintenance Records, dated January 9, 1984, is canceled.
3. RELATED REGULATIONS. 14 CFR parts 1,43,9 1, and 145.
4. DISCUSSION. The Code of Federal Regulations state that a U.S. standard airworthiness
certificate is effective until it is surrendered, suspended,r evoked, or a termination date is
otherwise establishedb y the Administrator. In addition to those terms, a U.S. standard
ainvorthiness certificate is effective only as long as the maintenance,p reventive maintenance,
and:a lterations are performed in accordancew ith parts 43 and 9 1, and the aircraft are registered
in the united States. Theset erms and conditions are further restated, in block 6, on the front of
F& Form 8 100-2, Standard Airworthiness Certificate. Qualified persons, who perform the
maintenance, preventive maintenancea nd alterations, shall make a record entry of this
accomplishment, thus maintaining the validity of the certificate of airworthiness. Adequate
aircraft records provide tangible evidence that the aircraft complies with the appropriate
airworthiness requirements. In accordancew ith the terms and conditions listed in block 6 of the
Standard Airworthiness Certificate, insuEcient or non-existent aircraft records may render that
standard airworthiness certificate invalid.
AC 43-9C 6/8/98
5. MAINTENANCE RECORD REQUIREMENTS.
zi. Responsibilities. 14 CFR part 9 1, section 9 1.4 17 states that an aircraft owner/operator
shall,k eep and maintain aircraft maintenancer ecords. 14 CFR part 43, sections4 3.9 and 43.11
state’that maintenance personnel,h owever, are required to make the record entries.
b. Maintenance Records That Are to Be Retained. Section 9 1.405 requires each owner
or operator to ensure that maintenance personnel make appropriate entries in the maintenance
recoi-dst o indicate that the aircraft has been approved for return to service. Section 9 1.417(a)
sets forth the content requirements and retention requirements for maintenance records.
Maintenance records may be kept in any format that provides record continuity; includes
required contents; lends itself to the addition of new entries; provides for signature entry; and,
is intelligible. Section 9 1.417(b) requires records of maintenance, alterations, and required or
app;oved inspections to be retained until the work is repeated,s upersededb y other work, or for
one year. It also requires the records, specified in section 91.417(a)(2), to be retained and
trandferred with the aircraft at the time of sale.
NOTE: Section 91.417(a) contains an exception regarding work accomplished
/
in accordance with section 91.411. This does not exclude the making of
entries for this work, but applies to the retention period of the records for
work done in accordance with this section. The exclusion is necessary since
the retention period of one year is inconsistent with the 24-month interval of
test and inspection specified in section 91.411. Entries for work done per this
section are to be retained for 24 months or until the work is repeated or
superseded.
c: Section 91.417(a)(l). Requires a record of maintenance, for each aircraft (including the
airfiime) and each engine, propeller, rotor, and appliance of an aircraft. This does not require
separateo r individual records for each of these items. It does require the information specified
in settions 9 1.41 7(a)(1 ) through 9 1.4 17(a)(2)(vi) to be kept for each item as appropriate. As a
practical matter, many owners and operators find it advantageoust o keep separateo r individual
records since it facilitates transfer of the record with the item when ownership changes.
Secti,on9 1.4 17(a)(1 ) has no cuJnterpart in section 43.9 or section 43.11.
d. Section 91.417(a)(l)(i). Requires the maintenance record entry to include “a description
of the work performed.” The description should be in sufficient detail to permit a person
unfapiliar with the work to understand what was done, and the methods and procedures used in
doink it. When the work is extensive, this results in a voluminous record. To provide for this
contingency, the rule permits reference to technical data acceptablet o the Administrator in lieu
of making the detailed entry. Manufacturer’s manuals, service letters, bulletins, work orders,
FAA AC’s, and others, which accurately describe what was done, or how it was done, may be
I
/
Page!2 Par5
AC 43-9c
referenced. Except for the documents mentioned, which are in common usage, referenced
documents are to be made a part of the maintenancer ecords and retained in accordancew ith
section 9 1.417(b).
NOTE: Certificated repair stations frequently work on components shipped
to them without the maintenance records. To provide for this situation,
repair stations should supply owners and operators with copies of work
orders written for the work, in lieu of maintenance record entries. The work
order copy must include the information, required by section 91.417(a)(l)
through section 91.417(a)(l)(iii), b e made a part of the maintenance record,
and retained per section 91.417(b). This procedure is not the same as that
for maintenance releases discussed in paragraph 16, and it may not be used
when maintenance records are available. Section 91.417(a)(l)(i) is identical
to its counterpart, section 43.9(a)(l), which imposes the same requirements
I
on maintenance personnel.
I!e . Section 91.417(a)(l)(ii). Is identical to section 43.9(a)(2) and requires entries to contain
the date the work was completed. This is normally the date upon which the work is approved
for return to service. However, when work is accomplishedb y one person and approved for
return to service by another, the dates may differ. Two signatures may also appear under this
circumstance; however, a single entry in accordancew ith section 43.9(a)(3) is acceptable.
f. Section 91.417(a)(l)(iii). Differs slightly from section 43.9(a)(4) in that it requires the
entry to indicate only the signature and certificate number of the person approving the work for
return to service, and does not require the type of certificate being exercised to be indicated as
does section 43.9(a)(4). This is a new requirement of section 43.9(a)(4), which assists owners
and operators in meeting their responsibilities. Maintenance personnel may indicate the type of
certificate exercised by using airframe (A), powerplant (P), airframe & powerplant (A&P),
inspection authorization (IA), or certificated repair station (CRS). _
g. Section 91,417(a)(2). Requires six items to be made a part of the maintenance record
and maintained as such. Section 43.9 does not require maintenancep ersonnel to enter these
items. Section 43.11 requires some of them to be part of entries made for inspections, but they
are all the responsibility of the owner or operator. The six items are discusseda s follows:
(1) Section 91.417(a)(2)(i). Requires a record of total time-in-service to be kept for the
airframe, each engine, and each propeller. Part 1, section 1.1, Definitions, defines time in
service, with respect to maintenancet ime records, as that time from the moment an aircraft
leaves the surface of the earth until it touches down at the next point of landing. Section 43.9
does not require this to be part of the entries for maintenance, preventive maintenance,
rebuilding, or alterations. However, section 43.11 requires maintenance personnel to make it a
part of the entries for inspections made under parts 9 1, 125, and time-in-service in all entries.
Page 3
AC 43-9C WV98
(a) Some circumstances impact the owner’s or operator’s ability to comply with
section 9 1.41 ? (a)(2)(i). For example, in the caseo f rebuilt engines, the owner or opera!or
would not have a way of knowing the total time-in-service, since section 9 1.42 1 permits the
maintenance record to be discontinued and the engine time to be started at zero. In this case,
the imaintenancer ecord and time-in-service, subsequentt o the rebuild, comprise a satisfactory
record.
(b) Many components, presently in-service, were put into service before the
requirements to keep maintenance records on them. Propellers are probably foremost in this
group. In these instances, practicable procedures for compliance with the record reqmrements
must be used. For example, total time-in-service may be derived using the procedures
described in paragraph 12; or if records prior to the regulatory requirements are just not
available from any source, time-in-service may be kept since last complete overhaul. Neither
of these procedures is acceptablew hen life-limited parts status is involved or when
airworthiness directive (AD) compliance is a factor. Only the actual record since new may be
used in these instances.
(c) Sometimes engines are assembledf rcm modules (turbojet and some
turbopropeller engines) and a true total time-in-service for the total engine is not kept. If
owners and operators wish to take advantage of this modular design, then total time-in-service
and a maintenancer ecord for each module is to be maintained. The maintenance records
specified in section 9 1.417(a)(2) are to be kept with the module.
I (2) Section 91,417(a)(2)(ii). Requires the current status of life-limited parts to be part
of the maintenancer ecord. If total time-in-service of the aircraft, engine, propeller, etc., is
entered in the record when a life-limited part is installed and the time-in-ser;lce of the life-
limi,ted part is included, the normal record of time-in-service automatically meets this
requirement.
(3) Section 91.417(a)(2)(iii). Requires the maintenancer ecord to indicate the time
since last overhaul of all items installed on the aircraft that are required to be overhauled on a
specified time basis. The exp!anation in paragraph 5g (2) also applies to this requirement.
(4) Section 91,.417(a)@)(iv). Deals with the current inspection status and requires it to
be reflected in the maintenancer ecord. Again, the explanation in paragraph 5g (2) is
appropriate even though section 43.11( a)(:!) requires maintenancep ersons to determine time-
in-service of the item being inspected and to include it as part of the inspection entry.
j (5) Section 91.417(a)(2)(v). Requires the current status of applicable AD’s to be a part
of the maintenance record. Tiner ecord is to include, at minimum, the method used to comply
with the AD, the AD number, and revision date; and if the AD has requirements for recurring
Page4
618198 AC 43-9C
action, the time-in-service and the date when that action is required. When AD’s are
accomplished, maintenancep ersonsa re required to include the items specified in section
4i.9(a)(2), (3), and (4) in addition to those required by section 91.417(a)(2)(v). An example of
a maintenancer ecord format for AD compliance is contained in Appendix 1.
(6) Section 91.417(a)(Z)(vi). In the past, the owner or operator has been permitted to
maintain a list of current major alterations to the airframe, engine(s), propeller(s), rotor(s), or
appliances. This procedure did not produce a record of value to the owner/operator or to
maintenancep ersons in determining the continued airworthiness of the alteration since such a
record was not sufficient detail. This section of the rule has now been changed. It now
prescribes that copies of FAA Form 337, issued for the alteration, be made a part of the
maintenancer ecord.
6. PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE.
a. Preventive maintenancei s defined in part 1, section 1.1. Part 43, appendix A, paragraph (CB
lists those items which a pilot may accomplish under section 43.3(g). Section 43.7 authorizes
appropriately rated repair stations and mechanics, and personsh olding at least a private pilot
certificate to approve an aircraft for return to service after they have performed preventive
maintenance. A!! of these persons must record preventive maintenance accomplished in
accordancew ith the requirements of section 43.9. AC 43-12, Preventive Maintenance, current
edition, contains further information on this sub-ject.
b. The type of certificate exercised when maintenanceo r preventive maintenance is
accomplishedm ust be indicated in the maintenancer ecord. Pilots may use private pilot (PP),
commercial pilot (CP), or air transport pilot (ATP) to indicate private, commercial, or airline
transport pilot certificate, respectively, in approving preventive maintenance for return to
service. Pilots are not authorized by section 43.3(g) to perform preventive maintenanceo n
aircraft when they are operated under part 12 1, 127, 129, or 135. Pilots may only approve for
return to service preventive maintenance that they themselves have accomplished.
7, REBUILT ENGINE MAINTENANCE RECORDS.
a. Section 9 1.421 provides that zero time may be granted to an engine that has been rebuilt
by a manufacturer or an agency approved by the manufacturer. When this is done, the
owner/operator may use a new maintenance record without regard to previous operating history.
c b. The manufacturer or an agency approved by the manufacturer that rebuilds and grants
zero time to an engine is required by section 9 1.421 to provide a signed statement containing:
1) the date the engine was rebuilt; 2) each change made, as required by an AD; and 3) each
change made in compliance with service bulletins, when the service bulletin specifically
requests an entry to be made.
Par5 Page5
AC 43-9C 6/8/98
c. Section 43.2(b) prohibits the use of the term rebuilt in describing work accomplished in
required maintenance records or forms unless the component worked on has had specific work
functions accomplished. These functions are listed in section 43.2(b) and, except for testing
requirements, are the same as those set forth in section 9 1.421 ( c). When terms such as
remanufactured, reconditioned, or other terms coined by various aviation enterprises are used
in maintenance records, owners and operators cannot assumet hat the functions outlined in
section 43.2(b) have been done.
8. RECORDINGTACHOMETERS.
a. Time-in-service recording devices senses uch things as electrical power on, oil pressure,
wheels on the ground, etc. , and from these conditions provide an indication of time-in-service.
With the exception of those that sense aircraft lift-off and touchdown, the indications are
approximate.
b. Some owners and operators mistakenly believe these devices may be used in lieu of
keeeing time-in-service in the maintenancer ecord. While they are of great assistancei n
arriving at the time-in-service, such instruments, alone, do not meet the requirements of section
9 1.4 17. For example, when the device fails and requires change, it is necessaryt o enter time-
in-service and the instrument reading at the change. Otherwise, record continuity is lost.
9. MAINTENANCE RECORDS FORADCOMPLIANCE. Thissubjectiscoveredin
AC 39-7, Airworthiness Directives for General Aviation Aircraft, current edition. A separate
AD ‘record may be kept for the airframe and each engine, propeller, rotor, and appliance, but is
not required. This would facilitate record searchesw hen inspection is needed, and when an
engine, propeller, rotor, or appliance is removed, the record may be transferred with it. Such
records may also be used as a schedule for recurring inspections. The format, shown in
Apdendix 1, is a suggestedo r 0. and adherencei s not mandatory. Owners should be aware that
they may be responsible for nun-compliance with AD’s when their aircraft are leasedt o foreign
operators. They should, therefore, ensure that leasess hould be drafted to deal with this subject.
10. ~IAINTENANCERECORDSFORREQUIREDINSPECTIONS.
a. Section 43.11 contains the requirements for inspection entries. While these requirements
are imposed on maintenancep ersonnel, owners and operators should become familiar with
them in order to meet their responsibilities under section 9 1.405.
I$ The maintenance record requirements of section 43.11 apply to the loo-hour, annual,
and progressive inspections under part 91; mspection programs under parts 91 and 125;
approved airplane inspection programs under part 135; and the loo-hour and annual
inspections under section 135 .4 11( a)( 1).
Page 6
Par 7
61819a
AC 43-9C
c.,~ Appropriately rated mechanics are authorized to conduct these inspections and make the
required entries. Particular attention should be giv,ent o section 43.1 l(a)(7) in that it now
requires a more specific statement than previously required ;lnder section 43.9. The entry
, In
addition to other items, must identify the inspection program used; identify the portion or
segment of the inspection program accomplished; and contain a statement that the inspectio n
was performed in accordancew ith the instructions and procedures for that program.
d.; Questions continue regarding multiple entries for lOO-hour/annuali nspections. As
discussedi n paragraph 5c, neither part 43 nor part 91 requires separater ecords to be kept.
Section 43.11, however, requires personsa pproving or disapproving equipment for return to
service, after any required inspection, to make an entry in the record of that equipment.
Therefore. when an owner maintains a single record, the entry of the 100-hour or annual
inspection is made in that record. If the owner maintains separater ecords for the airframe,
pow&plants, and propellers, the entry for the loo-hour inspection is entered in each, while the
annual inspection is only required to be entered into the airframe record.
I 1. I)IsCREPANCY LrsTs.
al’ Before to October 15, 1982, issuanceo f discrepancy lists (or lists of defects) to owners
or operators was appropriate only in connection with annual inspections under part 91;
inspections under section 135.41 1( a)( 1); inspection programs under part i25; and inspections
under section 91.217. Now, section 43.11 requires that a discrepancy Iist be prepared by a
person performing any inspection required by parts 91, 125, or section 135.41l (a)( 1).
b. When a discrepancy list is provided to an owner or operator, it says in effect, except for
these’discrepancies,t he item inspected is airworthy. It is imperative, therefore, that inspections
be complete and that all discrepanciesa ppear in the list. When circumstances dictate that an
inspe,ctionb e terminated before it is completed, the maintenancer ecord should clearly indicate
that the inspection was discontinued. The entry should meet all the other requirements of
section 43.1 1.
c.. It is no longer a requirement that copies of discrepancy lists be forwarded to the iocal
Flight StandardsD istrict Office (FSDO).
d.’ Discrepancy lists (or lists of defects) are part of the maintenance record and the
owner/operator is responsible to maintain that record in accordancew ith section 91.417(b)(3),
The entry made by maintenancep ersonnel in the maintenancer ecord should reference the
discrepancy list when a list is issued.
12. LOST OR DESTROYED RECORDS. Occasionally, the records for an aircraft are lost
or destroyed. In order to re-construct them, it is necessaryt o establish the total time-in-service
of the airframe. This can be done by reference to other records that reflect the time-in-service;
/
Par 16 Page7
AC 43-9C 6/8/98
research of records maintained by repair facilities; and reference to records maintained by
indivi&al mechanics, etc. When these things have been done and the record is still
incomplete, the owner/operator may make a notarized statement in the new record describing
the loss and establishing the time-in-service basedo n the research and the best estimate of
time-in-service.
a. The current status of applicable AD’s may present a more formidable problem. This
may require a detailed inspection by maintenancep ersonnel to establish that the applicable
AD’s have been complied with. It can readily be seen that this could entail considerable time,
expense,a nd in some instances, might require recompliance with the AD.
b. Other items required by section 9 1.4 17(a)(2), such as the current status of life-limited
parts, time since last overhaul, current inspection staLus,a nd current list of major alterations,
may present difficult problems. Some items may be easier to reestablish than others, but all are
problems. Losing maintenancer ecords can be troublesome, costly, and time consuming.
Safekeeping of the records is an integral part of a good record keeping system.
13. COMPUTERIZED RECORDS. There is a growing trend toward computerized
maintenance records. Many of these systems are offered to owners/operators on a commercial
basis. While these are excellent scheduling systems, alone they normally do not meet the
requirements of sections 43.9 or 91.417. The owner/operator who uses such a system is
required to ensure that it provides the information required by section 9 1.4 17, including
signatures. If not, modification to make them complete is the owner’s/operator’s responsibility
and @at responsibility may not be delegated.
14. kJBLIC AIRCR4FT. Prospective purchaserso f aircraft that have been used as public
aircraft, should be aware that public aircraft may not be subject to the certification and
maintenance requirements in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations and may not have
records that meet the requirements of section 9 1.4 17. Considerable research may be involved
in establishing the required records when these a?craft are purchased and brought into civil
aviation. The aircraft may not be certificated or used without such records.
15. LIFE-LIMITED PARTS.
a! Present day aircraft and powerplants commonly have life-limited parts installed. These
life limits may be referred to as retirement times, service life limitations, parts retirement
limitations, retirement life limits, life limitations, or other such terminology and may be
expressedi n hours, cycles of operation, or calendar time. They are set forth in type certificate
data ‘sheets( TCDS), AD’s, or the iimitations section of FAA-approved airplane or rotorcraft
fligh’t manuals. Additionally, instructions for continued airworthiness, which require life-limits
be specified, may apply (See CFR 23 Appendix G and CFR 27 Appendix A).
Page.8, Par 12
6/8/98 AC 43-9C
b. Section 91.417(a)(2)( ii ) req uires the owner or operator of an aircraft with such parts
installed to have records containing the current status of these parts. Many owners/operators
have found it advantageoust o have a separater ecord for such parts showing the name of the
part, part number, serial number, date of installation, total time-in-service, date removed, and
signature and certificate number of the person installing or removing the part. A separate
record, as described, facilitates transferring the record with the part in the event the part is
removed and later reinstalled or installed on another aircraft or engine. If a separater ecord is
not kept, the aircraft record must contain sufficient information to clearly establish the status of
the life-limited parts installed.
‘,
16. MAJNTENANCE RELEASE.
a. In addition to those requirements discussedp reviously, section 43.9 requires that major
repairs and alterations be recorded as indicated in appendix B of part 43, (i.e., on FAA Form 337).
Ah exception is provided in paragraph (b) of that appendix, which allows repair stations
certificated under part 145 to use a maintenance releasei n lieu of the form for major repairs (and
on,ly major repairs).
b. The maintenance releasem ust contain the information specified in paragraph (b)(l), (2)
arrd (3), appendix B of part 43, be made a part of the aircraft maintenancer ecord, and retained
by the owner/operator as specified in section 9 1.4 17. The maintenance release is usually a
special document (normally a tag) and is attached to the product when it is approved for return
to’ service. The maintenancer elease may, however, be on a copy of the work order written for
the product. When this is done (for major repairs only) the entry on the work order mnst
meet paragraph (b)(l), (2), and (3) of the appendix. That is i J say that the Repair Station is
re@ired to give the owner: (1) the customers work order upon which the repair is recorded;
(2) a signed copy of the work order; and (3) a maintenancer elease which has been signed by an
authorized representative of the company. In some cases,a work order and a maintenance
release may be a different document. Both must be supplied to the customer.
i c. Some repair stations use what they call a maintenance release for other than major
repairs. This is sometimes a tag and sometimes information on a work order. When this is
done, all of the requirements of section 43.9 must be met (paragraph (b)(3), appendix B, not
applicable) and the document is to be made and retained as part of the maintenance records
unber section 91.4 17 per discussion in paragraph 5c.
17, FAA FORM 337, MAJOR REPAIR AND ALTERATION.
a. Major repairs and alterations are to be recorded on FAA Form 337, as stated in
paragraph 16. This form is executed by the person making the repair or alteration. Provisions
are made on the form for a person other than that person performing the work to approve the
repair or alteration for return to service.
Par 15 Page9
-,; _._..__.. -_.- ..-...
b. Thcsc forms art’ now required to bc made part of the maintenance record of the product
repaired or altcrcd and retained in accordancew ith section 91.4 17.
C. Detailed instructions for use of this form are contained in AC 43.9-l. Instructions for
Completion of !:A/\ Form 337. current edition.
d. Some manufacturers have initiated a policy of indicating, on their service letters and
bulletins. and other documents dealing with changest o their aircratt, whether or not the
changesc onstitute major repairs or alterations. Some manufacturers also indicate that the
responsibility for completing FAA Form 337 lies with the person accomplishing the repairs or
alterations and cannot be delegated. When there,is a question, it is advisable to contact the
local FSDO for guidance.
18. TESTS AND INSPECTIONS FOR ALTIMETER SYSTEMS, ALTITUDE
REPORTING EQUIPMENT, AND AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL (ATC)
TRANSPONDERS. The recordation requirements for these tests and inspections are the
same as for other maintenance. There are essentially three tests and inspections (the altimeter
system, the transponder system, and the data correspondencet est), each of which may be
subdivided relative to who may perform specific portions of the test. The basic authorization
for berforming these tests and inspections. found in section 43 3, is supplementedb y
sections 9 I .4 I I and 9 I .4 13. When multiple personsa re involved in the performance of tests
and inspections. care must be exercised to insure proper authorization under these three
s&ions and compliance with sections4 3.9 and 43.9(a)(3) in pa-titular.
19.‘.:B EFORE YOU BUY. This is the proper time to take a clos,: look at the maintenance records
of any used aircraft you expect to purchase. A well-kept set of maintenance records, which
properly identifies all previously performed maintenance,a lterations, and AD compliances. is
generally a good indicator of the aircraft condition. This is not always the case, but in any event,
before you buy. require the owner to produce the maintenancer ecords for your examination, and
reqhire correction of-any discrepanciesf ound on the aircraft or in the records. Many prospective
owriers have f‘ound it advantageoust o have a reliable unbiasedm aintenance person examine the
maintenance records. as well as the aircraft, before negotiations have progressed too far. If the
airdraft is purchased. take the time to review and learn the system of the previous owner to ensure
co&pliance and continuity when you modify nr continue that system.
Thomas I<. Stuck&
Acting Director. Flight Standards
S+vice
I
!-iqz&q=
Next Compbu Authorized Signature.
l Aircraft. Engine. Propeller, Rotor, or Appliance: Make Model S.N. N
