Advisory
Circular
U.S Department
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration AC 120-63
Date: 1 O/l II94
HELICOPTER SIMULATOR QUALIFICATION
Initiated By: AFS-205
Advisory
U.S. Department
Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: HELICOPTER SIMULATOR Date: 1 O/l l/94 AC No: 120-63
QUALIFICATION initiated by: AFS-205
1. PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC) provides an acceptablem eans, but not the only means, for
qualifying helicopter simulators to be used in training programs or for airman checking under various parts
of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR). Criteria specified in this AC are those used by the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) to determine whether a simulator is qualified for such training and checking
and, if so, the qualification level. While these guidelines are not mandatory, they are derived from extensive
FAA and industry experience in determining compliance with the pertinent FAR. Mandatory terms used
in this circular such as “shall” or “must” are used to ensure compliance with the criteria set forth in
the advisory circular when the acceptablem ethod of compliance describedh erein is used. Applicable regula-
tions must also be referencedt o ensure compliance with the provisions therein. This AC does not change
regulatory requirements or create additional ones, and does not authorize changes in, or deviations from,
regulatory requirements. This AC applies only to the evaluation of helicopter simulators. Criteria for the
evaluation of airplane simulators are containedi n AC 120-40,a s revised, ‘ ‘Airplane Simulator Qualification. ’ ’
2. RELATED FAR SECTIONS. FAR Part 1 and FAR 5s 61.51, 61.55, 61.57, 61.58, 61.63, 61.65,
61.67,61.155,61.157,61.161,61.163,135.293,135.297,1 35.323,a nd 135.335.
3. RELATED READING MATERIAL. AC 150/5300-2,a s revised, “Airport Design Standards - Site
Requirements for Terminal Navigational Facilities”; AC 150/5340-l, as revised, “Marking of Paved Areas
on Airports’ ‘; AC 150/5340-4, as revised, “Installation Details for Runway Centerline Touchdown Zone
Lighting Systems”; AC 150/5340-19,“ Taxiway Centerline Lighting System”; AC 150/5340-21, “Airport
Miscellaneous Lighting Visual Aids”; AC 150/5340-24,“ Runway and Taxiway Edge Lighting System”;
AC 150/5345-28,a s revised, “Precision Approach Path Indicator (PAPI) Systems”; AC 150/5390-1 , as revised,
‘ ‘Heliport Design Guide”; and AC 120-40,a s revised, “Airplane Simulator Qualification.”
4. BACKGROUND.
a The FAA has been involved in flight simulator evaluation and approval for well over three decades.
As far back as 1954, air carriers were allowed to perform limited proficiency check maneuversi n AIRPLANE
simulators. Credit for the use of these devices was hampered by the state of the technology available in
early simulator development. More recently, however, rapid technological advances have permitted and
encouragedt he expandedu se of flight simulators in the training and checking of flight crewmembers. In
addition, the complexity, operating costs, and operating environment of modem aircraft have lead to the
increasing use of advanceds imulator technology. Extensive experienceh as proven that modem simulators
can provide more in-depth training than can be accomplished in the aircraft as well as provide a very high
transfer of learning and behavior from the simulator to the aircraft. Their use, in lieu of aircraft, results
in safer flight training and cost reductionsf or the operators,w hile achieving fuel conservationa nd a significant
reduction in environmental impact.
lOIll/ AC12043
b. In recognition of expanding flight simulator capabilities, as technology has progressed,F AR revisions
have been developed to permit the increasedu se of AIRPLANE simulators in approved training programs.
To date, the FAR have not addressedth e training and checking of flight crewmembersi n helicopter simulators
which, as a result, limited their use. Those helicopter simulators in use today have been evaluated and
approvedo n a case-by-caseb asis. By exemption to the FAR, some personsh ave received credits for training
and checking received in helicopter simulators. Provisions have been made in this document to permit
the continued use of these existing simulators provided they continue to meet the criteria under which they
were originally evaluateda nd approved.
c. The same factors that have led to the widespread use and acceptanceo f airplane simulators, such
as technological advancementsa, ircraft complexity, operatingc ost, operating environment, enhancedt raining,
safety, environmental impact, etc., have recently spurreda dramatic increasei n interest in helicopter simulators.
It is anticipated that the use of helicopter simulators will expand rapidly and that applicable regulations
will be amended to extend formal credit to the use of helicopter simulators in approved training programs.
a Evaluation and qualification of simulators and flight training devices are the responsibility of the
FAA National Simulator Program Manager (NSPM). The NSPM is also responsible for the development
of standardsg, uidancea nd policy concerningt hesed evices.
5. DEFINITIONS AND APPLICATION.
u Helicopter Simulator is a full size replica of a helicopter cockpit, representing a specific type or
make, model, and series. It also includes the assemblageo f equipment and computer programs necessary
to represent the helicopter in ground and flight operations, a visual system providing a real time out-of-
the-cockpit view, a control force system, and a motion system which provides cues that are at least equivalent
to that of a three-degrees-of-freedomm otion system; and is in compliance with the minimum standards
for a Level B simulator. Appendix 1 describest he minimum requirementsf or Level B, Level C, and Level
D helicopter simulators.
b. Qualijktion Test Guide (QTG) is a document designedt o validate that the performancea nd handling
qualities of the simulator agree within prescribed limits to those of the helicopter and that all applicable
regulatory requirements have been met. The QTG includes both the helicopter and simulator data used
to support the validation. The Master Qualification Test Guide (MQTG) is the FAA-approved QTG and
incorporatest he results of FAA witnessed tests. The MQTG serves as the referencef or future evaluations.
c. Convertible Simulator is a simulator in which hardware and software can be changed so that the
simulator becomesa replica of a different model, but usually of the samet ype, helicopter.
d Highlight Brightness is the area of maximum displayed brightness which satisfies the brightness
test in Appendix 1, Item 4.1.
e. Latency is the additional time beyond that of the basic helicopter perceivable response time due
to the responset ime of the simulator. This includes the time delay effects of the computer system, control
loading system, motion system, visual system, instruments,a nd all data communication and interface systems.
$ National Simuliztor Program Manager (NSPM) is the FAA Manager responsible for the overall
administration and direction of the National Simulator Program.
g. Operator, as used in this AC, is the person or organization that requests FAA qualification of a
simulator for use within the operator’s FAA-approved training program and is responsible for continuing
qualification and liaison with the FAA.
h. Simuliztion Da are the various types of data used by the simulator manufacturer and the applicant
to design, manufacture,a nd test the flight simulator.
2
AC12043
10/u/94
i SimuZiztor Evahztion Specialist is an FAA technical specialist trained to evaluate simulators and
to provide expertiseo n matters concernings imulation.
j. Snapshot is a presentationo f one or more variables at a given instant of time. A snapshot is
appropriatef or a steadys tatec ondition in which the variablesa re constantw ith time.
k. Statement of CompZiance (SOC) is a certification from the operator that specific requirements have
been met. The SOC incorporatesr eferencest o neededs ourceso f information for showing compliance, ration-
ale to explain how the referencedm aterial is used, mathematical equations and parameter values used, and
conclusionsr eached.
I. Time History is a presentationo f the change of a variable with respect to time. (It is usually in
the form of a continuous data plot over the time period of interest or a printout of test parameter values
recordeda t multiple constantt ime intervals over the time period of interest.)
m. Transporf Delay is the total simulator system processing time required from a pilot primary flight
control input signal until a motion system, visual system, and instrument response. It is the overall time
delay incurred from signal input until output response. It does not include the aircraft dynamic response
of the helicopter simulated.
n. Upgrade, for the purpose of this AC, means the improvement or enhancemento f a simulator for
the purposeo f achieving a higher level qualification.
o. VaZickztionF right Test Da@ for the purposeo f this AC, are the flight and ground handling, perform-
ance, stability and control, propulsion, and other necessaryt est parameterse lectronically recorded in a heli-
copter using a calibrated data acquisition system verified as accurate by the company performing the test.
P. Visual System Response Time is the interval from an abrupt control input to the completion of
the visual display scan of the first video field containing the resulting different information.
6. DISCUSSION.
a. The proceduresa nd criteria for simulator evaluation and qualification under the National Simulator
Program are contained in this AC. There are currently three levels of complexity of helicopter simulators,
levels B, C, and D, which are comparable in complexity and intended use to airplane simulators of the
same level. Level A is reservedf or potential future use. A simulator, qualified by the NSPM in accordance
with the guidancea nd standardsh erein, will be recommendedf or approval to the operator’sp rincipal operations
inspector( POI) or certificate holding district office, as applicable for use within the operator’s training program.
6. Evaluation of simulators used for training or certification of airmen under Title 14 CFR fall under
the direction of the National Simulator Program. A simulator will be evaluated under the provisions of
this AC if it is used in a training program approved for the sponsoring operator under FAR Part 121 or
135 or if it is used as part of the FAA-approved training program by the operator in the course of conducting
the Pilot-in-Command Proficiency Check required by FAR 5 61.58, the issuanceo f an airline transport pilot
(ATP) certificate or type rating in accordance with the provisions of FAR § 61.163, or the issuance of
a type rating in accordancew ith the provisions of FAR 5 61.63.
c. Under the National Simulator Program concept, the simulator is evaluated for a specific operator
by an FAA Simulator Evaluation Specialist. Based on a successful evaluation, the NSPM will certify that
the simulator meets the criteria of a specific level of qualification. Upon qualification by the NSPM, approval
for use of the simulator in the operator’s approved training program will be determined by the PO1 in the
case of FAR Part 121, 127, 133, or 135 certificate holders or by the district office responsiblef or oversight
of a training center when the training center is using the simulator to conduct checks required by FAR
Part 61 as part of its approvedt raining program.
3
AC l20-63 lO/ll/94
d, FAA evaluation of a simulator located outside the United States will be performed if the simulator
is being used by the U.S. operatort o train or certificate U.S. airmen. Evaluationsm ay be conductedo therwise
as deemeda ppropriateb y the Administrator on a case-by-caseb asis.
e. Operatorsw ho contract to use simulators already qualified and approvedf or the sponsoringo perator
at a particular level for a helicopter type are not subject to the qualification process. However, they are
requiredt o obtain FAA approvalt o use the simulator in their approvedt raining programs.
7. EVALUATION POLICY.
Q, The methods, procedures,a nd standardsd efined in this AC provide one means, acceptable to the
Administrator, to evaluate and qualify a simulator. If an applicant choosest o utilize the approachd escribed
in this AC, he must adhere to all of the methods, procedures,a nd standardsh erein. However, this is not
to imply that the NSPM may not apply sound engineering and/or operational judgment in the review or
acceptanceo f data, data presentations,o r other material or elements and have the application remain within
the applicability of this particular method of compliance. Should an applicant desire to use another means,
a proposal must be submitted to the NSPM for review and approval prior to the submittal of a detailed
QTG. During the developmento f this AC, frequencyr esponsem ethods were discussed,b ut were not selected
as the primary means of simulator validation. The FAA is, however, receptive to proposals using frequency
responsed ata as an alternativem eanso f validation.
b. The simulator is evaluated in those areas that are essential to completing the airman training and
checking process as required by regulation and by the sponsoring operator’s approved training program.
This may include the following: aerodynamicr esponsesp; erformancei n hover, takeoff, climb, cruise, descent,
autorotation,a pproach,a nd landing; flight control checks;c ockpit functions checks;a nd additional requirements
dependingu pon the complexity or qualification level of the simulator. The motion system, instructor station
functions, and visual system will also be evaluatedt o ensuret heir proper operation.
c. The intent is to evaluate the simulator as objectively as possible. Pilot acceptance,h owever, is
also an important consideration. Therefore, the simulator will be subjected to validation tests presented
in Appendix 2 of this AC, and to the functions and subjective tests presentedi n Appendix 3. These tests
include a qualitative assessmenot f the simulator by an FAA pilot who is qualified in the respectiveh elicopter.
Validation tests are used to compare simulator and helicopter data objectively to ensure that they agree
within specified tolerances. Functions tests are designedt o provide a basis for evaluating simulator capability
to perform over a typical training period and to verify correct operation of the simulator controls, instruments,
and systems.
d Tolerances,l isted for parametersi n Appendix 2, should not be confused with design tolerancess peci-
fied for simulator manufacture. Tolerancesf or the parametersl isted in Appendix 2 are the maximum accept-
able to the Administrator for simulator validation.
e. A convertible simulator will be addresseda s a separates imulator for each model and series to which
it will be converted and for which FAA qualification will be sought. An FAA evaluation is required for
each configuration. For example, if an operator seeks qualification for two models of a helicopter type
using a convertible simulator, two QTG’s or a supplementedQ TG and two evaluationsa re required.
J Initial qualification.
(1) Only the aircraft manufacturer’sf light test data will be acceptedf or initial simulator qualification
undert he following circumstances:
(a) When an original type certificate was issueda fter June 1980.
(b) When significant amendmentsa re made to an original type certificate.
(c) When a supplementalt ype certificate would change the handling qualities or performance.
lWlll94 AC 120-63
(2) Exceptions to this policy must be submitted to the NSPM for review and consideration. It
is the intent of the FAA that all testsl isted in this AC be applied to simulator qualification.
(3) The NSPM will consider the use of alternative data from the helicopter manufacturer for heli-
copters which were type certificated before the issuanceo f this AC. For older helicopters, additional flight
testing may be necessary.
(4) For a new type or model of helicopter, predictedd ata validated by the manufacturer’s preliminary
flight test data may be used for an interim period as determined by the FAA. In the event predicted data
is used in programming the simulator, it should be updated as soon as practicable when actual helicopter
flight test data becomesa vailable. Unless specific conditions warrant otherwise, this updates hould be accom-
plished within six months after releaseo f the final flight test data packageb y the helicopter manufacturer.
g. If a problem with a validation test result is detected by the FAA Simulator Evaluation Specialist,
the test may be repeated. If it still does not meet the test criteria, the operator may demonstratea lternative
test results which relate to the test in question. In the event a validation test(s) does not meet specified
criteria, but the criteria are not considered critical to the level of evaluation being conducted, the NSPM
may conditionally qualify the simulator at that level. The operator will be given a specified period of time
to correct the problem and submit the QTG changes to the NSPM for evaluation. Alternatively, if it is
determined that the results of a validation test would have a detrimental effect on the level of qualification
being sought or if the test outcome is a firm regulatory requirement, the NSPM may qualify the simulator
to a lesser level or restrict maneuvers based upon the evaluation completed. For example, if a Level D
evaluation is requesteda nd the simulator fails to meet hover test criteria, it could be qualified at Level B.
Ji. Evaluation datesw ill not be establishedu ntil the QTG has beenr eviewed by the NSPM and determined
to be acceptable. Within 10 working days of receiving an acceptable QTG, the NSPM will coordinate
with the operatora nd PO1 to set a mutually acceptabled ate for the evaluation. To avoid unnecessaryd elays,
the operator is encouragedt o work closely with the NSPM during the QTG development process prior to
making formal application.
i. At the discretion of the FAA Simulator Evaluation Specialist, the operator’s pilots may assist in
completing the functions and validation tests during evaluations. However, only FAA personnel should
manipulate the pilot controls during the functions check portion ofan FAA evaluation.
8. INITIAL OR UPGRADE EVALUATION AND QUALIFICATION.
a, The operator seeking simulator initial or upgrade evaluation and qualification pursuant to this AC
must submit a request in writing to the NSPM through the PO1 or the responsible FAA Flight Standards
District Office (FSDO). This request must contain an SOC certifying that the simulator meets all of the
provisions of this AC. This shall include a certification that the cockpit configuration of the simulator
conforms to that of the helicopter; the specific hardware and software configuration control proceduresh ave
been established; and that the simulator is representativeo f the helicopter in all functional test areas, as
confirmed by the operator’sd esignatedp ilots. A sample letter of requesti s included in Appendix 4.
b. The operators hall submit a QTG which includes the following:
(1) A title page with the operatora nd FAA approval signatureb locks.
(2) A simulator information page,f or eachc onfiguration in the caseo f convertible simulators, provid-
ing the following:
(a) Operator’s simulator identification number or code.
(b) Helicopter model and seriesb eing simulated.
0 Aerodynamic model and datar evisions (as applicable).
C
5
10ml94
AC 120-63
(d) Engine model and its datar evision.
(e) Plight control model and data revisions (as applicable).
(f) Flight ManagementS ystem identification and revision level.
(g) Simulator model and manufacturer.
(h) Date of simulator manufacture.
(i) Simulator computeri dentification.
(i) Visual systemm odel and manufacturer.
(k) Motion system type and manufacturer.
(3) Table of contents.
(4) Log of revision and/orl ist of effective pages.
(5) Listing of all references ourced ata.
(6) Glossary of terms and symbols used.
(7) WC’s that shall provide referencest hat include sourceso f information for showing compliance;
rationale to explain how the referencedm aterial is used; mathematical equationsa nd parameterv alues used;
and conclusions reached. Refer to Appendix 1, “Simulator Standards,” comments column, for SQC require-
ments.
(8) Recording procedureso r a list of equipmentr equiredo r the validation tests.
(9) The following for eachv alidation test designatedin Appendix 2 of this AC:
0a Name of the test.
00 Objective of the test.
0C Initial conditions.
(a Manual test procedures.
0e Automatic test procedures( if applicable).
(0 Method for evaluatings imulator validation test resul tS .
(s) Tolerancesf or relevant parameters.
01) Sourceo f Helicopter Test Data (documenta nd page In umber).
0i Copy of Helicopter Test Data.
.
0) Simulator Validation Test Results,a s obtainedb y the operator.
00 A means, acceptablet o the NSPM, of easily comparing the simulator test results to Heli-
copter Test Data.
c. The operator’s simulator validation test results must be recorded on a multichannel recorder, line
printer, or other appropriate recording media acceptablet o the NSPM. Simulator results shall be labeled
using terminology common to helicopter parameters instead of computer software identifications. These
results shall be easily compared to the supporting data by employing cross plotting, overlays, transparencies,
overplotting of manufacturerd ata, or other acceptablem eans. Helicopter data documents included in a QTG
may be photographically reducedo nly if such reduction will not alter the graphic scaling or cause diffkulties
in scale interpretationo r resolution. Incremental scaleso n graphical presentationsm ust provide the resolution
necessaryf or evaluation of the parameterss hown in Appendix 2. The test guide will provide the documented
6
lWly94 AC 120-63
. proof of compliance with the simulator validation tests in Appendix 2. In the case of a simulator upgrade,
the operator must run all validation tests neededf or the requestedq ualification level. Validation test results
offered in a test guide for a previous initial or upgrade evaluation should not be offered to validate the
simulator performance in a test guide offered for a current upgrade. For tests involving time histories,
the flight test data sheets or transparenciest hereof and the results of the simulator tests shall be marked
clearly with the appropriater eferencep oints to ensurea n accuratec omparisonb etween simulator and helicopter
data with respect to time. Operators using line printers to record time histories shall clearly mark that
information taken from the line printer data output for cross-plotting on the helicopter data. The cross-
plotting of the operator’s simulator data to helicopter data is essential to verify simulator performance in
each test. During an evaluation, the FAA will perform a detailed check of selected tests from the QTG.
The FAA evaluation servest o validate the operator’ss imulator test results.
d The completed QTG and the operator’s compliance letter and request for the evaluation shall be
submitted through the operator’s POI. The PO1 will then submit the total packagew ith a letter or memoran-
dum of endorsementt o the NSPM. The QTG will be reviewed and determined to be acceptable prior to
schedulinga n evaluation of the simulator.
e. A copy of a QTG for each type simulator by each simulator manufacturer will be required for
the NSPM’s file. The NSPM may elect not to retain copies of the QTG for subsequents imulators of the
same type by a particular manufacturer, but will determine the need for copies on a case-by-caseb asis.
Data updates to an original QTG shall be provided to the NSPM in order to keep FAA file copies current.
$ The operatorm ay elect to accomplish the QTG validation testsw hile the simulator is at the manufactur-
er’s facility. Tests at the manufacturer’s facility should be accomplished at the latest practical time prior
to disassembly and shipment. The operator must then validate simulator performance at the final location
by repeating at least l/2 of the validation tests in the QTG and submitting those tests to the NSPM. After
review of these tests, the FAA will schedule an initial evaluation. The QTG must be clearly annotated
to indicate when and where eacht est was accomplished.
g. In the event an operator moves a simulator to a new location and its level of qualification is not
changed,t he following proceduress hall apply:
(1) The operators hould advise the PO1a nd NSPM of the move.
(2) Before returning the simulator to service at the new location, the operator shall perform a typical
recurrent validation and functions test. The results of such tests will be retained by the operator and be
available for inspection by the FAA at the next evaluation or as requested.
(3) The NSPM may schedulea n evaluation prior to return to service.
h. When there is a change of operator, the new operator must accomplish all required administrative
procedures including the submission of the cwTently approved MQT Guide (MQTG) through the PO1 to
the NSPM. The QTG must be identified with the new operator by displaying the operator’s name or logo.
The PO1 will then submit the packagea s described in paragraph9 .d. The simulator may, at the discretion
of the NSPM, be subject to an evaluation in accordancew ith the original qualification criteria.
i The scheduling priority for initial and upgradee valuations will be based on the sequencei n which
acceptableQ TG’s and evaluation requestsa re receivedb y the NSPM.
j. The QTG will be approved after the completion of the initial or upgrade evaluation and after all
discrepanciesi n the QTG have been corrected. This document, after inclusion of the FAA witnessed test
results, becomes the MQTG. The MQTG will then remain in the custody of the operator for use in future
recurrente valuations.
7
AC 120-63 10/u/94
.
9. RECURRENT EVALUATIONS.
Q, For a simulator to retain its qualification pursuant to this AC, it will be evaluated on a recurrent
basis using the approved MQTG. Unless otherwise determined by the NSPM, recurring evaluations will
be accomplished every 6 months by a Simulator Evaluation Specialist. Each recurrent evaluation, normally
scheduledf or 8 hours of simulator time, will consist of functions tests and approximately l/2 of the validation
tests in the MQTG. The entire MQTG will, therefore,b e completedo n an annualb asis.
b. Normally, dates of recurrent evaluations will not be scheduled beyond 30 days of the date due.
Exceptions to this policy will be considered by the NSPM on a case-by-caseb asis to addresse xtenuating
circumstances.
c. In the interest of conserving simulator time, the following Optional Test Program (OTP) is an alter-
native to the S-hourr ecurrente valuation procedure:
(1) The operator of a simulator having the appropriatea utomatic recording and plotting capabilities
may apply for evaluation of that simulator under the OTP.
(2) The operator must notify the NSPM in writing of its intent to enter the OTP. If the FAA
determines that the evaluation can be accommodatedw ith 4 hours or less of simulator time, recurrent evalua-
tions for that simulator will be planned for 4 hours. If the 4hour period is or will be exceededa nd the
operator cannot extend the period, then the evaluation will be terminated and must be completed within
30 days to maintain qualification status. The FAA will then reassessth e appropriatenesso f the OTP.
(3) Under the OTP, at least l/2 of all the validation tests will be performed and certified by the
operator between FAA recurrent evaluations. Completion of all validation tests will be required through
any two consecutive recurrente valuations. This information will be reviewed by the FAA Simulator Evalua-
tion Specialist at the outset of each evaluation. These tests should be accomplished within the 30 days
prior to the schedulede valuation or accomplished on an evenly distributed basis during the 6-month period
precedingt he schedulede valuation. Twenty percento f those testsp erformed by the operatorf or each recurrent
evaluation will then be selected and repeatedb y the Simulator Evaluation Specialist along with 10 percent
of thoset ests not performed by the operator.
d. Prior to arrival for an on-site evaluation, the FAA inspector will notify the operator if any tests
are planned to be run that may require special equipment or technicians. These tests would include latencies,
control dynamics, soundsa nd vibrations, or motion systemt ests.
e. If the operator plans to remove a simulator from active status for a prolonged period, the following
proceduress hall apply to requalify the simulator pursuantt o this AC:
(1) The NSPM and PO1 shall be advised in writing. The notice shall contain an estimate of the
period in which the simulator will be inactive.
(2) Recurrent evaluationsw ill not be scheduledd uring the inactive period. The NSPM will remove
the simulator from qualified status on a mutually establishedd ate no later than the date on which the next
recurrente valuation would have been scheduled.
(3) Before a simulator can be restored to FAA qualified status, it will require an evaluation by
the NSPM. The evaluation content and time required for accomplishment will be based on the number
of recurrent evaluations missed during the inactive period. For example, if the simulator were out of service
for 1 year, it would be necessaryt o complete all tests contained in the test guide since, under the recurrent
evaluationp rogram, all validation tests in the MQTG are to be completeda nnually.
(4) The operator shall notify the NSPM of any changes to the originally scheduled time out of
service.
8
lWlm4 AC12043
(5) Normally, the simulator will be requalified using the FAA-approved MQTG and criteria that
were in effect prior to its removal from qualification. Inactive periods exceeding 1 year or failure to adhere
to the precedingp roceduresw ill require a review of the qualification basis.
$ In general, convertible simulators will be evaluatedi n alternating model configurations so that only
one model configuration is evaluated during any one recurrent evaluation. This policy is dependentu pon
a high degree of commonality between model configurations and is subject to review by the NSPM on
a case-by-caseb asis. .
10. SPECIAL EVALUATIONS.
Q, Between recurring evaluations,i f deficienciesa re discoveredo r it becomesa pparentt hat the simulator
is not being maintained to initial qualification standardsa, special evaluation of the simulator may be conducted
by the NSPM to verify its status.
b. The PO1 shall advise the operatora nd the NSPM if a deficiency is jeopardizing training requirements.
Arrangements shall then be made to resolve the deficiency in the most effective manner, which may include
the withdrawal of approval by the POI.
11. MODIFICATION OF SIMULATORS, MOTION SYSTEMS, AND VISUAL SYSTEMS.
Q, The operator must notify the PO1 and NSPM at least 21 calendar days prior to making software
program or hardware changesw hich might impact flight or ground dynamics of the simulator. A complete
list and description of these planned changes,i ncluding dynamics related to the motion and visual systems,
must be provided in writing. Any necessaryu pdates to the MQTG shall also be identified. Operators
should maintain a configuration control system to ensuret he continued integrity of the simulator as qualified
and to account for changesi ncorporated The configuration control system may be examined by the FAA
on request.
b. Modifications which impact flight or ground dynamics, systems functions, and significant QTG revi-
sions may require an FAA evaluationo f the simulator.
12. SIMULATOR QUALIFICATION BASIS. The FAR require that the simulator must maintain its
approved performance, functions, and other characteristics. All initial, upgrade, and recurrent evaluations
of any simulator qualified according to the acceptablem ethods of compliance described herein will be con-
ducted in accordance with the provisions of this AC. Those simulators approved prior to this AC will
continue to maintain their current qualification as long as they meet the standardsu nder which they were
originally approved, regardlesso f operator. Any simulator upgraded to Level C or Level D standards,o r
any visual system or motion system upgrade,r equires an initial evaluation of that simulator, visual system,
or motion system in accordancew ith the provisions herein.
13. LOSS OF QUALIFICATION/WITHDRAWAL OF APPROVAL.
Q, The simulator will lose its qualification under this AC if the NSPM determines that it no longer
meetst he original simulator validation criteria basedo n a recurrento r speciale valuation.
b. While not a loss of qualification, the PO1 may withdraw approval for the use of the simulator in
the approved training program, pursuantt o this AC, when a deficiency is jeopardizing training requirements.
The PO1 will advise the NSPM that this action has been taken, and together they shall determine if further
evaluation by the NSPM is required.
William J. White ”
Deputy Director, Flight StandardsS ervice
9
