Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Circular
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: Maintainer Fatigue Risk Date: 12/2/16 AC No: 120-115
Management Initiated by: AFS-300 Change:
1 PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC):
1. Describes the basic concepts of human fatigue and how it relates to safety for aviation
maintenance organizations and individual maintainers.
2. Provides information on Fatigue Risk Management (FRM) in terms of fatigue hazards
and mitigation strategies specific to aviation maintainers.
3. Describes the benefits of implementing FRM methods within aviation maintenance
organizations.
4. Identifies methods for integrating FRM within a Safety Management System (SMS)
(if applicable).
Note: This AC is informational and is not mandatory. It does not constitute a
regulation.
2 RELATED READING MATERIAL. Additional information about this topic can be
found in the current editions of the following documents:
• AC 117-2, Fatigue Education and Awareness Training Program.
• AC 117-3, Fitness for Duty.
• AC 120-100, Basics of Aviation Fatigue.
• AC 120-103, Fatigue Risk Management Systems for Aviation Safety.
• The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Maintenance Fatigue website,
https://www.faa.gov/about/initiatives/maintenance_hf/fatigue.
• International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO). Fatigue Risk Management
Systems: Implementation Guide for Operators. 2011.
• Avers, K., and W.B. Johnson. “A Review of Federal Aviation Administration Fatigue
Research: Transitioning Scientific Results to the Aviation Industry.” The Journal of
Aviation Psychology and Applied Human Factors 1.2 (2011): 87-88.
• Hobbs, A., K.B. Avers, J.J. Hiles. Fatigue Risk Management in Aviation
Maintenance: Current Best Practices and Potential Future Countermeasures.
Technical Report DOT/FAA/AM-11/10. Washington, D.C.: Federal Aviation
Administration, Office of Aerospace Medicine, 2011.
12/2/16 AC 120-115
Note: This document summarizes and does not reproduce the scientific references
in the documents listed above. This list is not all-inclusive.
3 BACKGROUND. We are a nation of sleep-deprived workers. It is estimated that adults
attempt to function on 1 to 1.5 hours less sleep than the generally recommended 8 hours
per night. Human fatigue costs U.S. businesses over $136 billion in lost productivity each
year. The losses do not include cost estimates associated with workplace injury, insurance
claims, or rework. Of concern to Aviation Safety (AVS) is the finding that maintenance
personnel tend to get 3 hours less sleep per night than is recommended. That is a sleep
debt twice the national average. Sleepiness and fatigue associated with sleep debt is
cumulative. This means that losing even an hour of sleep every other night over the
course of a week will produce conditions that negatively affect performance. Some of the
most critical performance errors associated with worker fatigue include, but are not
limited to:
• Impaired judgment and decision making;
• Impaired communication skills;
• Decreased attention span and ability to recall information;
• Irritability;
• Slower reaction times; and
• Increased risk-taking.
3.1 Critical Issue. Personnel fatigue was first identified as a critical issue in aviation
maintenance by the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) in 1996, stemming
from the ValuJet accident in Florida. Since then, it continued to gain attention as a
maintenance safety risk:
1. In 2000, an FAA field study that collected 50,000 hours of ActiGraph data from
maintenance personnel across multiple organizations found that maintainers were
typically getting about 5 hours of sleep;
2. In 2006, an FAA survey of international human factors (HF) programs in
maintenance organizations revealed that over 80 percent of those responding
indicated that human fatigue was an issue;
3. In 2008, an FAA conference on human fatigue revealed that scientists, regulators,
company management, and labor representatives all agreed that human fatigue poses
a safety hazard in the aviation maintenance industry and that individuals, and
government and civilian organizations, need to take appropriate action; and
4. In 2010, the FAA Administrator publicly committed to review all aspects of FAA
regulations that address human fatigue.
4 INTRODUCTION. The importance of managing human fatigue risk in the aviation
maintenance industry cannot be overemphasized. This AC will provide maintenance
organizations and the individual maintainer with the information necessary to detect
2
12/2/16 AC 120-115
fatigue symptoms, to identify fatigue hazards, to assess the associated safety and health
risks, and to implement fatigue countermeasures. It will provide the necessary
information to determine acceptable approaches/tools for mitigating fatigue-related risks
and to create science-based business practices for managing fatigue risks.
4.1 Causes of Human Fatigue. The causes of fatigue in aviation maintenance are shared by
the employer and by the individual maintainer. Causes of fatigue can be categorized
related to the most responsible entity.
4.1.1 Factors primarily under the control of the individual maintainer may include:
1. Amount of sleep in previous 72 hours;
2. Quality of sleep;
3. Continuous hours awake;
4. Emotional, physical, or medical issues that interfere with restorative sleep (i.e., sleep
quality); and
5. Underutilizing and overlooking the importance of sleep opportunities.
4.1.2 Factors primarily under the control of the employer may include:
1. The start time and duration of the shift;
2. Work and work/life schedule changes;
3. Suboptimal rotation of shift schedules;
4. Not having a routine work schedule;
5. Work schedules that overlap with time periods when the body is biologically
programmed to sleep (known as circadian rhythm);
6. Working too long at the same task; and
7. Working under suboptimal conditions, such as low staffing levels, insufficient breaks,
poor lighting, noise, extreme temperatures, and so on.
4.2 Fatigue Hazards. Human fatigue is a safety hazard in performing any and all
maintenance tasks because, at a minimum, it can impair judgment, make it difficult to get
and stay focused, cause forgetfulness, affect mood, and reduce motivation. Fatigue
hazards not only affect the safety of the flying public, but also pose risks to the safety and
health of the maintainer, the maintenance organization, and the industry as a whole.
4.2.1 Safety Risk. Fatigue affects worker safety on and off the job. Fatigue in the workplace
can be a serious safety hazard and is repeatedly linked to errors that lead to incidents and
accidents.
3
12/2/16 AC 120-115
• The relative risk of work-related injuries increases approximately 15 percent on
afternoon shifts and 28 percent on night shifts, as compared to morning shifts.
• A large U.S. air carrier found that injury risk increases dramatically after a worker has
been on the job for 8 hours. Workers on a 12-hour shift had more than double the risk
of suffering an injury than workers on an 8-hour shift. Workers on a 16-hour shift had
more than four times the risk of suffering an injury than workers on an 8-hour shift.
• The NTSB estimates that fatigue causes at least 100,000 crashes, 40,000 injuries, and
1,550 deaths on U.S. roadways per year.
4.2.2 Health Risk. Fatigue is related to increases in health issues, doctor visits, use of sick
leave, impaired driving, and difficulty dealing with home and social life. Health issues
include, but are not limited to:
• Heart disease and high blood pressure;
• Depression, anxiety, and stress;
• Gastrointestinal disorders (peptic ulcers, indigestion, heartburn, flatulence, upset
stomach, or constipation);
• Overeating;
• Higher alcohol and drug use; and
• A lower sense of overall well-being.
4.3 Duty-Time Limitations. Historically, the FAA has managed fatigue in aviation
maintenance with personnel duty-time limitations. Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 121, § 121.377 states that, “Within the United States, each
certificate holder (or person performing maintenance or preventive maintenance
functions for it) shall relieve each person performing maintenance or preventive
maintenance from duty for a period of at least 24 consecutive hours during any
seven consecutive days, or the equivalent thereof within any one calendar month.”
Eventually, an enhanced application of fatigue modelling with use of wearable
technologies (e.g., Fitbit devices) will help workers and employers assess fatigue risk and
adjust schedules accordingly. SMS and Fatigue Risk Management Systems (FRMS) will
help ensure that schedules need not be based on “one-size-fits-all” duty-time limitations.
4.3.1 Scientific Evidence. Scientific evidence indicates that duty time interacts with sleep loss,
time of day, time since last sleep, time on task, environmental conditions, type of work
schedule, schedule rotation/changes, and other causes of fatigue, and that each should be
considered when developing work schedules. An effective approach to managing fatigue
risk should take the same data/information into consideration, regardless of the size of the
operation.
4.4 FRM. Conceptually, FRM serves to help make informed decisions regarding how to
identify, mitigate, and prevent fatigue-related risk. In practice, FRM, be it a plan, policy,
program, or system, contains the processes/procedures (i.e., reactive, proactive, and
predictive) used for purposes of maximizing personnel alertness. FRM also minimizes
4
12/2/16 AC 120-115
fatigue-related performance errors that create safety hazards and risk for the maintainer,
team/crew members, the public, and aircraft/equipment.
4.4.1 Promotion of FRM Techniques. Along with the FAA, the ICAO, the European Aviation
Safety Agency (EASA), Transport Canada (TC), the Civil Aviation Safety Authority of
Australia, and worldwide agencies in the aviation, road, and rail transport industries have
been promoting, and in some cases requiring, use of FRM techniques. Most notably,
Public Law (PL) 111-216, Airline Safety and Federal Aviation Administration Extension
Act of 2010, Section 212(b), Fatigue Risk Management Plan, established a requirement
for part 121 air carriers to develop, implement, and maintain a Fatigue Risk Management
Plan (FRMP) for the air carrier’s pilots that is acceptable to the Administrator.
4.4.2 Benefits of FRM. Applying FRM strategies has significant worker and organizational
benefits related to safety and health. The documented benefits include, but are not
limited to:
• Fewer on-the-job accidents and injuries;
• Fewer physical illnesses;
• Reduced absenteeism;
• Reduced turnover;
• Reduced morale problems;
• Reduced insurance claims and premiums;
• Reduced damage to equipment and aircraft;
• Increased average sleep time and sleep quality; and
• An improved quality of life.
4.4.3 SMS. FRM should be part of an SMS. The integration provides a comprehensive
approach in identifying hazards and managing risks that extends beyond regulatory
compliance. Below are underlying principles of effective FRM as it applies to an SMS:
1. It requires a systemic approach involving, at a minimum, company policies; incident
reporting and analysis systems; and reactive, proactive, and predictive risk assessment
that define responsibilities, authority, input, procedures and processes, and outputs,
which are basic elements of safety management.
2. It requires a partnership between the employer and the employee, as each can
contribute uniquely to solutions.
3. It identifies an organization’s hazards related to worker fatigue. Thus, requirements of
an effective SMS minimize the need for additional fatigue-specific regulations.
4. It ensures that the hazards and any associated risks are identified and mitigated, and
that the level of risk is continuously monitored. Thus, risks are as low as reasonably
practical, as it is unrealistic to aim for “zero fatigue.”
5
12/2/16 AC 120-115
5 DEFINITIONS.
5.1 Acute Fatigue. Acute fatigue is a somewhat sudden onset of physical or mental
exhaustion. It is closely related to recent sleep (last 24 hours), time since last sleep, and
current time of day. Less than 8 hours of sleep in the last 24 hours, being awake longer
than 17 hours, and working between midnight and 6:00 a.m. are associated with acute
fatigue in the average person.
5.2 Biomarkers. Biomarkers are characteristic biological properties that can be detected and
measured in the body, such as in the blood or tissue. Biomarkers may indicate either
normal, abnormal, or diseased processes in the body. Currently, there are no easily
obtainable biomarkers of fatigue. However, several biomarkers of the circadian rhythm
exist, such as core body temperature and melatonin levels. In the absence of biomarkers
to identify fatigue, we can directly measure fatigue effects in performance variables, or
indirectly by using measures of sleep and time of day, and by modeling the effects of
these conditions on performance.
5.3 Chronic Fatigue. The average adult needs about 8 hours of sleep per day. If the average
person gets less than the required amount of sleep each day for multiple days, then a state
of chronic fatigue can occur. With chronic fatigue, performance is degraded and recovery
tends to be relatively slow. A person can hasten recovery by attempting to sleep longer
than the normal amount for several days. Chronic fatigue is often the result of a physical
condition or psychological condition.
5.4 Circadian Rhythm. The body’s internal clock, the circadian rhythm, tells your body
when to be awake and when to go to sleep. The circadian rhythm is closely aligned with
day and night and is sensitive to light exposure. Humans are preprogrammed to be awake
when it is light and sleep when it is dark. Twice during the day, the body slows down. It
happens mid- to late afternoon, between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m., so expect to experience
drowsiness during the lull. If one is awake after midnight and into the early morning
hours between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., which is counter to the body’s natural rhythm,
then one should also expect to experience drowsiness.
5.5 Fatigue. Fatigue refers to a physiological state in which there is a decreased capacity to
perform cognitive tasks and an increased variability in performance as a function of time
on task. Fatigue is also associated with tiredness, weakness, lack of energy, lethargy,
depression, lack of motivation, and sleepiness.
5.6 Fatigue Risk Management (FRM). A management program used to mitigate the effects
of fatigue.
5.7 Fatigue Risk Management System (FRMS). A nonprescriptive fatigue mitigation
system that minimizes the acute and chronic sources of fatigue.
5.8 Safety Management System (SMS). An SMS is a structured management system to
control risk in operations. It is an integrated network of people and other resources
performing activities that accomplish the safety mission and reach safety goals in the
aviation environment. Management of the system’s activities involves planning,
6
12/2/16 AC 120-115
organizing, directing, and controlling assets to meet the organization’s safety goals. The
safety management process starts with design, and implementing organizational
processes and procedures to control risk in aviation operations. Once controls are in
place, quality management techniques can be used to provide a structured process for
ensuring that the controls achieve their intended objectives, and to improve them where
they fall short. SMS relies on reliable and valid organizational data that fosters decision
making based on risk assessment (i.e., Risk-Based Decision Making).
5.9 Window of Circadian Low (WOCL). Individuals living on a regular 24-hour routine
with sleep at night have two periods of maximum sleepiness. These are known as
WOCLs. One WOCL occurs at night, roughly from 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m., a time when
physiological sleepiness is greatest and performance capabilities are lowest. The other
WOCL is in the afternoon, roughly from 3:00 p.m. to 5:00 p.m., and is less severe than
the nighttime WOCL.
6 FATIGUE BASICS. Complex around-the-clock aviation maintenance operations
heighten the challenge of fatigue among maintainers. Incident/event reports from
maintainers reveal that fatigue is a clear concern. The value of understanding fatigue
basics in regard to personal and flight safety cannot be overemphasized. There is
evidence that, more often than not, individually we are unaware when we start showing
signs of fatigue and unaware of the extent to which fatigue has impaired our
performance. This makes it very important that members of the maintenance workforce
are able to recognize signs of personal and others’ fatigue as soon as possible.
Understanding the fundamentals of fatigue and how it affects job performance, decision
making, and life in general will improve the ability to identify and manage associated
safety risks.
6.1 Warning Signs of Fatigue. Be familiar with the following common symptoms of fatigue
that could put individuals, coworkers, and the public at risk (Rosekind et al., 1996) listed
in Figure 1, Signs of Fatigue, below. These are observable indicators of fatigue. Some
signs are more noticeable than others, such as yawning, slowed reactions, and limited
communication versus lack of concentration, forgetfulness, and irritability. It is important
to note that these are the most common examples of symptoms, not an exhaustive list.
Also, these symptoms do not necessarily indicate fatigue; rather, a collection of
symptoms signifies that a person is experiencing at least some level of fatigue.
7
12/2/16 AC 120-115
Figure 1. Signs of Fatigue
6.2 Fatigue and Performance. The factors listed in Figure 1, above, are direct causes of
fatigue and actually make fatigue unavoidable. Consider this: after 16 hours of being
awake, our mental ability to perform work-related tasks decreases to a level consistent
with having a blood alcohol concentration of 0.05 percent. After 24 hours of no sleep,
mental impairment is consistent with performance deficits observed at roughly
0.10 percent blood alcohol concentration. Similarly, individuals operating on a 2-hour
sleep debt over 2 weeks (i.e., 6 hours of sleep, instead of the needed 8 hours, for 2 weeks
straight) perform similarly to an individual that has been awake for 16 hours or longer.
Despite increased effort to do the job right, as fatigue levels increase, poor performance is
inevitable. As a point of reference, most states and countries consider a 0.08 percent or
higher blood alcohol concentration a legal level of impairment for driving a motor
vehicle.
6.2.1 Operational Data. Operational data collected by a large U.S. air carrier maintenance
organization revealed that individuals working 16-hour days or longer were four times
more likely to be involved in a personnel injury incident/accident than an individual
working an 8-hour day. Individuals working 12-hour days were two times more likely to
be involved in a personnel injury incident/accident than an individual working an 8-hour
day. The work-related fatigue symptoms listed in paragraph 6.1 (e.g., reduced reaction
time, forgetfulness, and being withdrawn) clearly illustrate the level of risk associated
with fatigued maintainers remaining on duty. Numerous field and laboratory studies have
clearly shown that cognitive and psychomotor performance decreases with hours of
wakefulness.
6.3 Fatigue and Your Brain. When deprived of sleep, the brain generates the response of
sleepiness. If deprived of sleep for long enough, the brain can spontaneously shift from
wakefulness to sleep in an uncontrolled fashion. The more fatigued you are, the more
rapid and frequent the nodding off. You can nod off for short periods (e.g., microsleeps,
which last only seconds), or as long as several minutes. Most everyone has
unintentionally nodded off at one time or another. The potential safety risk of it
happening at the wrong time and place reinforces our personal and organizational
8
12/2/16 AC 120-115
responsibilities to manage fatigue risk. The bottom line is that working fatigued not only
puts an individual at risk, but also his or her colleagues, and ultimately the flying public.
6.4 Causes of Fatigue. Causes of fatigue are discussed in terms of those that actually make
fatigue unavoidable, referred to as primary factors, and those that might lead to fatigue.
Fatigue is the direct result of the following:
6.4.1 Disrupted Sleep and Sleep Loss. Just like food, water, and air, sleep is a basic biological
need that is critical to survival. Sleep is necessary for the mind and body to restore itself;
without it, your performance will begin to suffer. You may not be getting a sufficient
amount of sleep and/or the sleep that you do get is of poor quality. For example, if a
barking dog periodically wakes you multiple times throughout the night, you are more
likely to wake up without being fully rested and restored. It makes a big difference when
your daily routine includes, as a rule, between 7 and 9 hours of deep and undisturbed
sleep. If your daily routine lacks sufficient sleep, then you can expect to experience
fatigue symptoms due to sleep debt. Sleep debt is the difference between the amount of
sleep a person gets and the amount of sleep that they need. This debt must be repaid in
order for you to perform daily activities without feeling fatigue. Be aware that countering
a sleep deficit is not as easy as simply extending the time you sleep the next time. Rather,
it requires uninterrupted sleep along with sleeping longer. More extended periods of sleep
deprivation require more extended periods of sleep recovery.
6.4.2 Prolonged Wakefulness. The amount of time since you last woke up, which is your sleep
history, determines how long you have been continuously awake. As the length of time
since you were last asleep increases, your level of alertness decreases. This happens
regardless of how much or little sleep you got the previous night. There is no way to
“stockpile” sleep. You cannot sleep for 12 hours in an attempt to remain alert for the next
24 hours.
6.4.3 Circadian Rhythm. Your body’s internal clock, the circadian rhythm, tells your body
when to be awake and when to go to sleep. The circadian rhythm is closely aligned with
day and night and is sensitive to light exposure. Our bodies are preprogrammed to be
awake when it is light and asleep when it is dark. Twice during a day, the body slows
down. It happens mid- to late afternoon, between 3:00 p.m. and 5:00 p.m., so expect to
experience drowsiness during the lull. If you are awake after midnight and into the early
morning hours between 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., which is counter to your body’s natural
rhythm, you should expect to experience drowsiness.
6.4.3.1 Below are work-related situations and personal choices that minimize
opportunities for exposure to light and/or sleep and disrupt your body’s
internal clock, making it difficult to get adequate sleep.
• Overtime/back-to-back shifts;
• Early morning and night shifts;
• A rotating schedule;
• No work breaks;
9
12/2/16 AC 120-115
• Long commutes to and from work;
• Travel that crosses time zones;
• Use of sleep aids or other medications that can result in drowsiness or
keep people awake;
• Misuse of alcohol; and/or
• Use of caffeine before going to bed.
6.5 Multiple Secondary Factors of Fatigue. Secondary factors do not necessarily result in
fatigue; however, they are very likely to contribute to fatigue, especially if you
experience more than one factor or if they occur in combination with one or more
primary contributors.
6.5.1 Work Schedules. Work schedules that require reporting for duty before 7:00 a.m., after
6:00 p.m., and rotating shifts that do not align with our body’s natural wake and sleep
cycle, which results in too little or poor quality sleep. Rotating shifts and overtime can
also lead to fatigue based on the previous hours or days worked.
6.5.2 Work Environment. Work environments that put excessive demands on the body may
worsen fatigue levels. Examples of excessive demands are: vibration, loud or continuous
noise, excessive heat or cold, poor air quality, and poor lighting.
6.5.3 Work Demands. The physical, cognitive, and emotional demands of a job that create
relatively high workload contribute to fatigue.
6.5.4 Travel. Travel across time zones creates a mismatch between the body’s internal clock
(natural wake and sleep cycle) and the time change. Because the body has no time to
adjust, we end up going to sleep later than normal or waking up earlier than necessary, so
we do not get enough sleep and, in turn, we experience some level of daytime sleepiness.
6.5.5 Illness. Ongoing illnesses, such as allergies, colds, flu, muscle spasms, etc., can create a
level of discomfort that will keep you from getting restful sleep.
6.5.6 Sleep Disorders. Undiagnosed and untreated sleep disorders, such as sleep apnea, restless
leg syndrome, and insomnia can keep you from getting to sleep and staying asleep. If you
experience disrupted sleep, proper medical care may be necessary.
6.5.7 Lifestyle Choices. Lifestyle choices related to unhealthy habits in general, such as not
eating well-balanced meals, not exercising regularly, not staying hydrated, as well as
poor sleep habits in particular, such as watching TV in bed, and either smoking,
rigorously exercising, or overeating right before bedtime, have a profound negative
impact on sleep quality and duration.
10
12/2/16 AC 120-115
6.5.8 Use of Substances. Substances used too close to bedtime, such as caffeine and alcohol, or
used too close to waking up, such as sleep aids and medications, can contribute to fatigue.
6.5.9 Stress and Anxiety. Stress and anxiety often will keep you from falling asleep, even when
feeling very tired.
7 FATIGUE RISK MANAGEMENT (FRM). Aviation maintenance personnel face a
particular risk of fatigue due to night shift work, the potential for long and unregulated
duty times, and the sleep disruption that can result from these working conditions
(Hackworth et al., 2007; Johnson et al., 2001).
7.1 FRM in Aviation Maintenance. Most of the FRM approaches in industry have been
designed for continuous control tasks, such as driving a vehicle or operating an aircraft.
In such tasks, one of the major fatigue-related threats is an unwanted sleep episode, in the
form of either an extended period of sleep or a microsleep. In maintenance, falling asleep
at work is not the main hazard created by fatigue. Rather, a fatigued maintainer is at
increased risk of maintenance errors due to impaired mental functioning. Maintenance
organizations face a unique set of fatigue-related challenges; however, they also have
access to a unique set of potential solutions. As a result, FRM in maintenance can involve
a wider range of countermeasures than comparable systems developed for flightcrews or
vehicle drivers.
7.2 Characteristics of Maintenance Work. Although maintenance personnel must contend
with significant fatigue risks, some characteristics of aircraft maintenance provide
opportunities to mitigate the hazards presented by fatigue.
7.2.1 Maintenance Tasks. Maintenance tasks tend to be self-paced rather than externally paced.
Although much maintenance work is performed under time pressure, a maintainer
conscious of impaired performance may be able to pause a task, trade speed for accuracy,
or repeat a step as necessary.
7.2.2 Performance Modification. In some cases, there are opportunities to modify methods of
task performance in maintenance. In many cases, task cards can be modified and
error-capturing barriers can be added and introduced, such as secondary inspections or
operational/functional checks.
7.2.3 Flexibility. Maintenance organizations sometimes have flexibility to choose the time at
which certain tasks are performed. In such cases, it may be possible to schedule the most
safety-critical tasks, or those most susceptible to fatigue, at times when fatigue will have
the least impact.
7.2.4 Travel. Most maintainers are not required to travel across time zones while on duty.
Consequently, jet lag and travel-related circadian rhythm disruption, which are major
considerations for flightcrew FRMS, are not usually relevant in the maintenance
environment. The exception is when maintainers must travel to a remote work site to
perform a task.
11
12/2/16 AC 120-115
7.3 Employer and Employee Responsibilities. The conditions that produce fatigue originate
not only in the workplace but also in the employee’s personal life. Effective FRM
requires a partnership with shared responsibility between the employee and the employer.
7.3.1 Workplace Factors. Workplace factors include working hours, staffing levels,
environment, and the availability of break periods.
7.3.2 Personal Factors. Personal factors leading to fatigue can include social and family
commitments, commute time, second jobs, and medical conditions that may reduce the
quality or quantity of sleep. The employee has a responsibility to ensure, as much as
possible, that he or she is rested and “fit for duty” before reporting for work.
7.4 Objectives of FRM. FRM interventions can be characterized not only in terms of the
activities that comprise the approach, such as Hours of Service (HOS) limits and incident
reporting systems, but also the intended objectives of these activities. An approach
common to many risk management systems is a distinction between controls aimed at
hazard prevention, and controls directed at risk mitigation (Murphy and Yates, 2009;
Reason and Hobbs, 2003). Consistent with this distinction, the three potential objectives
of FRM should be considered as layers of defense.
1. The first and most obvious objective of fatigue countermeasures is to reduce the level
of fatigue experienced by personnel at work. This is the approach most commonly
referred to when considering FRM. Worker education, HOS limits, and the redesign
of shift schedules are examples of interventions intended to meet this objective.
2. The second class of interventions is designed to break the link between fatigue and
performance decrements. This can be achieved by reducing the probability that a
fatigued maintainer will make an error, or capturing fatigue-related errors once they
have occurred. Work breaks and additional task steps designed to capture errors are
examples of such interventions.
3. A final approach to manage the risks presented by maintainer fatigue is to minimize,
where possible, the operational consequences of errors, including fatigue-related. An
example is § 121.374(c), a regulation that prevents a possibly fatigued maintainer
from performing the same task on both engines of a twin-engine aircraft used in
Extended Operations (ETOPS). The rule is not intended to reduce fatigue or reduce
the probability of error. Rather, it tends to minimize the criticality of an error should
one occur. This AC acknowledges that manufacturers and operators must conduct
appropriate analyses to identify “critical tasks.” For example, fatigued cabin cleaning
crew may spill liquids, or loosen connections that could result in subsequent hazard
and risk. Sometimes the most basic activity can be critical, so the best alternative is to
assume that fatigued workers present hazards, regardless of their position.
8 HOW TO REDUCE FATIGUE. Fatigue reduction interventions are intended to
minimize fatigue in the workplace, while recognizing that its complete elimination is not
always practical. Interventions include HOS limits (whether voluntary or mandatory),
scientific scheduling, napping strategies, education, excused absences, and in certain
12
12/2/16 AC 120-115
cases, medical treatment. These interventions are described in detail in the following
paragraphs.
8.1 HOS Limits. In the United States, the only regulatory HOS limit that currently applies to
aviation maintenance is § 121.377. HOS limits are also instituted by non-government
agencies (including airlines, certified repair stations (CRS) and other maintenance, repair,
and overall companies). These limits are primarily used to restrict the length of duty days
as well as provide designated sleep or break opportunities to reduce fatigue.
8.2 Scientific Scheduling Models. In recent years, software modelling systems have been
incorporated into many FRMS. Software models have advantages over HOS limits as
they can take into account circadian variations in alertness and sleep obtained to produce
an estimate of the fatigue level that may result from a particular shift pattern. When used
as scheduling tools, software models have the advantage of offering greater flexibility
than hard HOS limits. However, they can also be implemented in conjunction with hard
limits. To utilize scheduling models, the user inputs an employee’s work and break times
over a 7-day period. The system then produces fatigue scores which express the level of
fatigue likely to be experienced by the person. Thresholds are set to inform whether the
fatigue level represents an unacceptable risk. Software modelling can be a useful tool as
part of a comprehensive FRMS, but must be used cautiously, with an awareness of the
capabilities and limitations of computerized models (Independent Transport Safety
Regulator, 2010). For a comprehensive review of fatigue modelling systems, refer to
Mallis et al. (2004). There can be a reasonable, scientific scheduling agreement between
management and labor. It is a good situation for all.
8.3 Napping Strategies. Naps can be helpful either as a preventative measure, as when taken
before reporting for a night of shift work, or as a way of improving alertness during a
night shift. Controlled studies have shown that even a brief sleep episode can result in
performance improvements. For instance, Purnell, Feyer, and Herbison (2002) found that
the vigilance performance of aircraft maintenance personnel on the first of
two consecutive 12-hour night shifts (7:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.) was improved by a
20-minute nap taken at around 3:00 a.m. No improvement was found on the second of the
two night shifts. The reason for this is unclear. Other studies have found that brief,
controlled sleeps of less than 40-minute duration have been shown to significantly
increase the alertness of airline pilots, resulting in reduced lapses and reduced response
time to stimuli (Rosekind et al., 1994). Similar benefits have been found for air traffic
controllers (Della Rocco, Comperatore, Caldwell, and Cruz, 2000) and truck drivers
(Macchi, Boulos, Ranney, Simmons, and Campbell, 2002).
8.4 Training and Educational Material. The provision of educational material to
employees is one of the few steps the organization can take to address the personal
lifestyle factors that contribute to fatigue. The FAA provides extensive educational
material on fatigue for maintenance personnel, including training material, video
material, and posters. This material can be accessed at http://www.faa.gov/about/initiativ
es/maintenance_hf/. Aviation Maintenance Technicians (AMT), inspectors, maintenance
planners, task schedulers, and the families of shift workers will benefit from information
on fatigue issues and steps they can take to help the shift worker obtain sleep. It is
13
12/2/16 AC 120-115
important to note that time worked, time awake, time asleep, and time of day are critical
in considering fatigue risk. It is also important to consider all factors associated with
sleep quality. The FAA training material addresses these factors.
8.5 Excused Absences. Some FRMS enable employees to take unplanned leave if they
believe their level of fatigue would prevent them from performing their duties (Cook,
2008). While sick leave is a generally accepted aspect of personnel management, “fatigue
leave” may be less readily accepted. Organizations need to weigh the potential disruption
caused by an unplanned absence against the potential harm that could result when an
employee reports for duty impaired.
8.6 Medical Treatment. In some cases, a maintainer’s fatigue at work may be a
consequence of an underlying medical condition, such as insomnia or sleep apnea
(Kryger, Roth, and Dement, 2005). In these situations, medical attention will be required
to address the root cause of the problem. A comprehensive FRMS must include measures
to ensure that at-risk employees receive appropriate medical treatment.
9 HOW TO REDUCE FATIGUE-RELATED ERRORS. Despite efforts to ensure that
employees are well-rested and alert when they report for duty, it is not possible to
completely eliminate fatigue from the workplace. Therefore, it is appropriate to have a
second line of defense with the objective of reducing the probability of error among
fatigued workers. The plain language slogan of this approach could be: “We know that
people are going to be fatigued. How can we manage the risk when a fatigued maintainer
is at work?” These interventions can involve one of two approaches: measures directed
towards individuals, or measures directed towards tasks.
9.1 Measures Directed Towards Individuals. Several methods are available to help
fatigued individuals recognize their level of fatigue and take steps to obtain temporary
relief.
9.1.1 Self-Assessment. The most obvious way to detect fatigue is self-assessment by the
employee. Several quick assessment guides are available to assist with this judgment,
although they should be used with caution as individuals are not always accurate judges
of their own level of fatigue (Dinges, Mallis, Maislin, and Powell, 1998).
9.1.2 Technologies. Several technologies offer the possibility of detecting a dangerous level of
fatigue at the start of a shift, or continuously throughout task performance. For the most
part, psychomotor performance tests have been used widely in research studies and have
been shown to be effective indicators of a person’s vigilance performance when fatigued.
Such tests require a period of performance monitoring to establish a baseline for each
individual. Changes in that baseline performance can be indicative of fatigue. The tests
are usually installed on a handheld device or even a smartphone, and typically measure
the person’s speed of response to a stimulus (Dinges and Powell, 1985; Thorne et al.,
2005). It must be understood that one-time use of a Psychomotor Vigilance Test (PVT)
and other such tests are not a tactical means to establish a fatigue level. However,
organized, established integration of PVT, and like devices/tests, can be a strategic tool
for an FRMS. Other technologies, such as eye movements, blink rate, performance
14
12/2/16 AC 120-115
measures, and voice analysis, also show promise as methods to detect fatigue in
operational personnel. Again, such devices are a strategic part of an FRMS. Alertness
monitoring systems are not likely to be adopted in maintenance in the near future; it is
conceivable that they may eventually play a part in an overall FRMS.
9.1.3 Exercise. Research shows that a period of exercise, such as a brief walk, can increase
alertness and temporarily reverse the impact of fatigue on some psychomotor tasks
(Bonnet, 2005; Bonnet and Arand, 1998; Wilkinson, 1965). However, the results appear
to be temporary, only lasting a matter of minutes. A maintenance technician experiencing
extreme fatigue may be able to call “time out” and put down their tools for a moment, or
perform a part of a task that requires physical activity, such as walking to a storeroom.
However, such breaks provide only temporary relief lasting a matter of minutes, and are
not feasible strategies for managing fatigue over long periods of time.
9.1.4 Environment. Certain aspects of the work environment can exacerbate or mask the effects
of fatigue. In some cases, improvements to the work environment may help maintainers
cope with fatigue. There is evidence that bright light can increase attentiveness and
reduce errors among otherwise fatigued individuals (Cajochen, 2007; Caldwell et al.,
2009; Campbell and Dawson, 1990; Dawson, Encel, and Lushington, 1995; Moore-Ede,
1993). These findings are a reminder that tasks performed in a dark environment, such as
fluorescent penetrant inspections, will be particularly challenging for a fatigued
individual. Exposure to fresh air or cool, dry air may also provide relief from fatigue,
although the benefit is temporary and may be slight (Bonnet, 2005; Moore-Ede, 1993).
Posture may also have an impact on fatigue susceptibility. An activity that is carried out
while standing or walking is less likely to be affected by fatigue than an activity
performed in a prone or seated position (Bonnet, 2005).
9.1.5 Caffeine. Caffeine is one of the most widely used stimulants, and if used carefully and in
moderation, can be part of an overall FRM strategy in maintenance. Caffeine has a
half-life in the body of around 5 hours, and shift workers should be careful to avoid
caffeine in the hours leading up to sleep. An exception is where caffeine is intentionally
taken immediately prior to a brief nap. The alertness-enhancing effects of caffeine do not
occur until approximately 30 minutes after the caffeine has been consumed, leaving a
brief window in which a useful nap may be taken. This combination of caffeine followed
immediately by a brief nap has been shown to significantly reduce fatigue during the
2 hours following the nap (Reyner and Horne, 1997). When caffeine is used as a fatigue
countermeasure, it is generally recommended that the person avoids the routine
consumption of caffeinated drinks, as caffeine is less effective as an alerting agent for
people who have developed caffeine dependence (Mitler and O’Malley, 2005).
9.2 Measures Directed Towards At-Risk Tasks. In addition to managing fatigue at the
level of the individual, it is also possible to break the link between fatigue and
maintenance error by changing aspects of the task assigned to the maintainer. Because
much of the worldwide work on FRM has been directed at pilots or vehicle operators, the
task-based approach has received relatively little attention. The task-based approach is
based on the idea that maintenance tasks vary along a continuum, from tasks that are
highly susceptible to fatigue, to those that are less susceptible. This approach is based
15
12/2/16 AC 120-115
upon the probability that an error will occur on a task, not necessarily the severity of the
consequences of the error. Task-based approaches to harm minimization can involve
two complimentary approaches: changing when the task is performed, and changing how
it is performed.
9.2.1 Scheduling Tasks. Even if the task steps involved in a maintenance procedure cannot be
modified, it may still be possible to reduce the susceptibility of a task to fatigue through
careful task scheduling. Most maintenance organizations do not appear to take the fatigue
susceptibility of a procedure into account when scheduling tasks. In some cases,
individual maintainers have informal norms concerning the time of day at which tasks are
performed. For example, when AMTs have discretion about the timing of tasks, they
sometimes choose to perform the most challenging tasks at the beginning of their shift,
leaving less complex tasks until the end of the shift, when they expect to be less alert. In
most large organizations, AMTs have limited control over the timing of tasks throughout
their shift, yet crew leads, foremen, or in some cases planning personnel may have some
discretion in task scheduling to minimize the impact of fatigue. Therefore, it is critical
that such personnel have an awareness of the impact of fatigue on human performance.
The following types of tasks have been identified as being most susceptible to
fatigue-related errors:
• Inter-trade communications;
• In-depth supervision;
• Training;
• Troubleshooting;
• Testing;
• Calibration;
• Inspection;
• Job planning; and
• Documenting of work.
9.2.2 Modifying Tasks. In some cases, it is possible to modify task procedures to reduce the
task’s susceptibility to fatigue-related errors, or to detect the presence of an error. Such
task-based interventions are sometimes referred to as “fatigue proofing.” Task-based
approaches to risk mitigation in maintenance can include:
• Close supervision;
• Working in pairs or teams, depending on the task;
• Task rotation;
• Checklists;
• Support for new personnel by experienced personnel;
16
12/2/16 AC 120-115
• Communication/briefings at shift handover;
• Breaking lengthy repetitive tasks into smaller tasks with breaks in between;
• Independent inspections; and
• Operational, functional, or formalized self-checks.
10 HOW TO MINIMIZE IMPACT OF FATIGUE-RELATED ERRORS. After efforts
have been made to reduce fatigue and to prevent or capture fatigue-related errors, a final
line of defense is to minimize the operational consequences of fatigue-related errors.
Tasks vary along a continuum from the most safety-critical to tasks having limited or
unlikely safety effect. Hazard prevention/reduction differs from the interventions
described in the preceding sections, as the focus is on the severity of fatigue-related
errors, rather than their probability. The plain language slogan of this approach could be:
“Despite our best efforts, fatigue-related errors will happen from time to time. How can
we make sure these errors do not have serious consequences?”
10.1 Harm Minimization. Harm minimization in the context of maintenance fatigue involves
keeping the most safety-critical tasks out of the hands of the most fatigued people. This
approach does not prevent the maintainer from making a fatigue-related error, but
reduces the likely consequences of the error. For example, if an overnight task involves a
disassembly stage followed by an assembly stage, it may be appropriate, when feasible,
to schedule the disassembly for the time of maximum fatigue, and the assembly for a time
at which fatigue is less likely. This arrangement is based on the assumption that an error
during assembly is likely to be more serious than an error during disassembly.
11 PROGRESSIVE RESTRICTIONS. The concept of progressive restrictions on work
responsibilities has been proposed as a fatigue countermeasure. This involves
progressively limiting the involvement of the individual in critical task steps as their level
of fatigue increases. Some propose that the certification and inspection authority of
maintenance personnel should be limited when they have been on duty for longer than
12 hours (Jauregui and Hosey, 2005). For example, a technician may be judged to be at
“moderate” risk of fatigue once their shift has passed beyond 12 hours (if a day shift), or
8 hours (if a night shift), or when more than 48 hours have been worked in a 7-day
period. These staff members are prohibited from carrying out secondary independent
inspections, detailed inspections, or involvement with structurally significant items and
critical systems. Technicians are judged to be at “extreme” risk of fatigue when a day
shift is extended beyond 14 hours (beyond 12 hours for a night shift), or when they have
worked more than 60 hours in a 7-day period. In addition to the above limitations,
personnel at “extreme” risk of fatigue are not allowed to perform any critical tasks
(including the performance or verification of Airworthiness Directives (AD)), are not
permitted to be in charge of engine runs, must not be responsible for functional and
operational checks on critical systems, and are not permitted to taxi aircraft.
“Unacceptable” fatigue risk is judged to commence when a person has been on duty for
16 hours (if their duty period started as a day shift) or 14 hours (if their duty period
started as a night shift) or when they have worked more than 72 hours in a 7-day period.
17
12/2/16 AC 120-115
A staff member with an “unacceptable” fatigue risk is not considered safe to perform any
work activities.
11.1 Determination of Activity Complexity. This AC is not suggesting that every
maintenance-related task must be assigned a level or risk, to include task complexity,
with associated rating of probability and severity of an error. While such a large effort
could be part of an FRMS, instead one could establish what a “reasonable person” would
consider to be a complex activity requiring a rested maintenance worker.
11.2 Assessments. Fatigue’s most common assessments, as mentioned above, include amount
of rest, number of hours awake, and time of day. However, organizations must be
cognizant of factors such as type of physical/mental strain, environmental conditionals,
industrial challenges, and more. Thus, HOS cannot be the sole determination of potential
fatigue.
Figure 2. Work Responsibility Restriction—Example
Example of the progressive restriction of work responsibilities as fatigue risk increases.
11.3 Implementation of Defensive Barriers for Fatigue. The concept of defensive barriers
was developed to prevent human errors from becoming critical events. Organizations that
are aware of fatigue and understand that personnel are fallible are then cognizant of
fatigue as a latent organizational weakness. “About 80% of all events are attributed to
human error… When the 80% human error is broken down further, it reveals that the
majority of errors associated with events stem from latent organizational weaknesses.”
18
12/2/16 AC 120-115
(DOE-HDBK-1028-2009, Human Performance Improvement Handbook, Volume 1,
Concepts and Principles, pages 1-10, 1-15, 2-9.) Organizations should utilize human
performance improvement tools to build defensive barriers into their administrative
controls, policies, and procedures (DOE-HDBK-1028-2009, Volume 2, Human
Performance Tools for Individuals, Work Teams, and Management). This can be done by
identifying critical tasks associated with all disciplines and at all levels of the
organization. Then, for each identified critical task, establish an administrative control
that would halt the progression of human error into a critical event. In short, events will
happen; however, those events will not become critical events unless a barrier has been
side-stepped or is nonexsistent. Volumes 1 and 2 of the DOE-HDBK-1028-2009 can be
found at https://www.standards.doe.gov/standards-documents/1000/1028-BHdbk-2009-
v1/@@images/file and https://www.standards.doe.gov/files/doe-hdbk-1028-2009-
human-performance-improvement-handbook-volume-2-human-performance-tools-for-
individuals-work-teams-and-management.
12 FRM WITHIN SMS.
12.1 Objectives. The trend towards formal FRMSs in transport has been slow to reach
aviation maintenance. An overall approach to FRM in maintenance can include
interventions directed at three objectives: reducing fatigue, reducing or capturing
fatigue-related errors, and minimizing the harm caused by fatigue-related errors. Most
fatigue countermeasures can actually address more than one of these objectives. Because
the FRMS approach was originally developed for pilots and vehicle drivers, most existing
FRMS focus on objective one, the reduction of fatigue. However, maintenance
organizations have greater opportunities to alter the scheduling and method of task
performance in response to the threat of fatigue. Therefore, objectives two and three
deserve special attention in maintenance operations.
12.2 Guiding Principles. FRMS is an application of the SMS model, through which hazards
are identified and risk is managed with a comprehensive approach that extends beyond
regulatory compliance, as described in AC 120-103. FRMS can be integrated within an
existing SMS, or can be developed as a standalone system. The following principles
guide FRM development:
• An FRMS requires a systemic approach, involving company policies; incident
reporting and analysis systems; reactive, proactive, and predictive risk assessment;
and the other elements of a general SMS.
• Effective FRM requires a partnership between the employer and the employee, as
each can contribute uniquely to solutions.
• It is unrealistic to aim for “zero fatigue” in all cases. An appropriate objective for
FRM is to ensure that risks are managed to a level as low as reasonably practical.
12.3 Commitment. Whatever approach to FRM is applied, commitment from all levels of the
organization is clearly essential. Upper management have a responsibility to state a clear
policy on fatigue, including how fatigue-related incidents will be dealt with under a just
safety culture. Supervisors and middle-level managers have a responsibility to ensure that
19
12/2/16 AC 120-115
the FRM policy is applied in day-to-day operations. Supervisors, crew leads, and
planners have a critical role in ensuring that fatigue and circadian factors are taken into
account in task assignment and planning. Finally, individual AMTs and inspectors are
ultimately responsible for the quality of their work. They must have a good understanding
of fatigue and its effects, must strive to arrive for duty well-rested, and must have access
to strategies to deal with workplace fatigue when it arises.
12.4 HOS Limits. In accordance with international best practices, HOS limits should be a
central part of any FRMS. In the absence of national HOS regulations, companies can
develop their own science-based policies. In addition to HOS limits, an FRMS for
maintenance will include a range of interventions addressing the task, the work
environment, and the fitness for duty of personnel, including organizational-level
elements such as company policies, reporting and incident analysis systems, risk
assessment, and mechanisms to periodically evaluate and improve the system.
Figure 3. Fatigue Risk Management (FRM) Elements
Elements of an FRM for maintenance.
John Barbagallo
Deputy Director, Flight Standards Service
20
12/2/16 AC 120-115
Appendix A
APPENDIX A. REFERENCES
1. Avers, K., and W.B. Johnson. “A Review of Federal Aviation Administration Fatigue
Research: Transitioning Scientific Results to the Aviation Industry.” The Journal of
Aviation Psychology and Applied Human Factors 1.2 (2011): 87-88.
2. Bonnet, M.H. “Acute Sleep Deprivation.” Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine.
4th ed. Eds. M.H Kryger, T. Roth, and W.C. Dement. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2005.
51-66.
3. Bonnet, M.H. “Sleep Deprivation.” Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 3rd ed.
Eds. M.H. Kryger, T. Roth, and W.C. Dement. Philadelphia: Saunders, 2000. 53-71.
4. Bonnet, M.H., and D. Arand. “Sleepiness as Measured by the MSLT Varies as a Function
of Preceding Activity.” Sleep 21.5 (1998): 477-483.
5. Cajochen, Christian. “Alerting Effects of Light.” Sleep Medicine Reviews 11.6 (2007):
453-464.
6. Caldwell, John A., et al. “Fatigue Countermeasures in Aviation.” Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine 80.1 (2009): 29-59.
7. Campbell, Scott S., and Drew Dawson. “Enhancement of Nighttime Alertness and
Performance with Bright Ambient Light.” Physiology & Behavior 48.2 (1990): 317-320.
8. Carskadon, M.A., and W.C. Dement. “Daytime Sleepiness: Quantification of a
Behavioral State.” Neuroscience Biobehavioral Review 11.3 (1987): 307-317.
9. Cook, B. “Managing Fatigue.” Flight Safety Australia 65 (2008): 22-26.
10. Dawson, Drew, Nicola Encel, and Kurt Lushington. “Improving Adaptation to Simulated
Night Shift: Timed Exposure to Bright Light Versus Daytime Melatonin Administration.”
Sleep: Journal of Sleep Research & Sleep Medicine 18.1 (1995): 11-21.
11. Della-Rocco, P.S., C. Comperatore, L. Caldwell, and C. Cruz. The Effects of Napping on
Night Shift Performance. Report No. DOT/FAA/AM-00/10. Washington, D.C.: Office of
Aerospace Medicine, 2000.
12. Dinges, D.F. “The Nature of Sleepiness: Causes, Contexts and Consequences.”
Perspectives in Behavioral Medicine: Eating, Sleeping and Sex. Eds. A. Stunkard and
A. Baum. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1989. 147-179.
13. Dinges, D.F. “Probing the Limits of Functional Capability: The Effects of Sleep Loss on
Short-Duration Tasks.” Human Performance and Cognition: Sleep, Arousal, and
Performance. Eds. R.J. Broughton and R.D. Ogilvie. Boston: Birkhauser, 1992. 177-188.
14. Dinges, D.F., and N.B. Kribbs. “Performing While Sleepy: Effects of
Experimentally-Induced Sleepiness.” Sleep, Sleepiness, and Performance. Ed. T. Monk.
Chichester, U.K.: John Wiley and Sons, Ltd, 1991. 98-128.
A-1
12/2/16 AC 120-115
Appendix A
15. Dinges, D.F., M. Mallis, G. Maislin, and J.W. Powell. Evaluation of Techniques for
Ocular Measurement as an Index of Fatigue and the Basis for Alterness Management.
DOT HS 808 762. Washington, D.C.: National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,
1998.
16. Dinges, D.F., and J.W. Powell. “Microcomputer Analyses of Performance on a Portable,
Simple Visual RT Task During Sustained Operations.” Behaviors Research Methods,
Instruments & Computers 17.6 (1985): 652-655.
17. Hackworth, Carla, et al. “A Survey of Maintenance Human Factors Programs Across the
World.” The International Journal of Applied Aviation Studies 7.2 (2007): 212-231.
18. Horne, J.A. “Human Sleep, Sleep Loss and Behaviour: Implications for Prefrontal Cortex
and Psychiatric Disorder.” British Journal of Psychiatry 162 (1993): 413-419.
19. Horne, J.A., and L.A. Reyner. “Sleep Related Vehicle Accidents.” British Medical
Journal 310.6979 (1995): 565-567.
20. Hursh, S.R., and H.P.A. Van Dongen. “Fatigue and Performance Modeling.” Principles
and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 5th ed. Eds. M.H. Kryger, T. Roth, and W.C. Dement.
Philadelphia: Saunders, 2010.
21. Jauregui, F., and P. Hosey. Extended Work Hours, Maintenance. West Sussex, UK:
International Federation of Airworthiness, 2005.
22. Johnson, William B., et al. Evaluation of Aviation Maintenance Working Environments,
Fatigue, and Human Performance. Washington, D.C.: Federal Aviation Administration,
2001.
23. Kryger, M.H., T. Roth, and W.C. Dement (Eds.). Principles and Practice of Sleep
Medicine. 4th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2005.
24. Macchi, M.M., Z. Boulos, T. Ranney, L. Simmons, and S.S. Campbell. “Effects of an
Afternoon Nap on Nighttime Alertness and Performance in Long-Haul Drivers.”
Accident Analysis & Prevention 34.6 (2002): 825-834.
25. Mallis, Melissa M., et al. “Summary of the Key Features of Seven Biomathematical
Models of Human Fatigue and Performance.” Aviation, Space, and Environmental
Medicine 75.3 Supplement 1 (2004): A4-A14.
26. Michael, D.J., B. Valle, J. Cox, J.E. Kalns, and D.L. Fogt. “Salivary Biomarkers of
Physical Fatigue as Markers of Sleep Deprivation.” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine
9.12 (2013): 1325-1331.
27. Mitler, M.M., and M.B. O’Malley. “Wake-Promoting Medications: Efficacy and Adverse
Effects.” Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine. 4th ed. Eds. M.H. Kryger, T. Roth,
and W.C. Dement. Philadelphia: Elsevier, 2005. 484-498.
28. Moore-Ede, Martin C. The Twenty-Four Hour Society: Understanding Human Limits in a
World that Never Stops. Addison-Wesley, 1993.
A-2
12/2/16 AC 120-115
Appendix A
29. Murphy, Craig N., and JoAnne Yates. The International Organization for
Standardization (ISO): Global Governance Through Voluntary Consensus. Routledge,
2009.
30. Naitoh, P. “Sleep Deprivation in Humans.” Research in Psychophysiology. Eds.
P.H. Venables and M.J. Christie. London: John Wiley, 1975.
31. Purnell, M.T., A.M. Feyer, and G.P. Herbison. “The Impact of a Nap Opportunity During
the Night Shift on the Performance and Alertness of 12-h Shift Workers.” Journal of
Sleep Research 11.3 (2002): 219-227.
32. Reason, James, and Alan Hobbs. Managing Maintenance Error: A Practical Guide.
CRC Press, 2003.
33. Reyner, L.A., and J.A. Horne. “Suppression of Sleepiness in Drivers: Combination of
Caffeine with a Short Nap.” Psychophysiology 34.6 (1997): 721-725.
34. Rosekind, M.R., P.H. Gander, K.B. Gregory, R.M. Smith, D.L. Miller, R. Oyung, and
J.M. Johnson. “Managing Fatigue in Operational Settings. 1: Physiological
Considerations and Countermeasures.” Behavioral Medicine 21.4 (1996): 157-165.
35. Rosekind, M.R., R.C. Graeber, D.F. Dinges, L.J. Connell, M.S. Rountree, and
C.L. Spinweber, et al. Crew Factors in Flight Operations IX: Effects of Planned Cockpit
Rest on Crew Performance and Alertness in Long-Haul Operations. Report No.:
DOT/FAA/92/24. Moffett Field, CA: NASA Ames Research Center, 1994.
36. Thorne, D.R., D.E. Johnson, D.P. Redmond, H.C. Sing, G. Belenky, and J. Shapiro. “The
Walter Reed Palm-Held Psychomotor Vigilance Test.” Behavior Research Methods
37.1 (2005): 111-118.
37. United States. U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration.
Advisory Circular 120-100, Basics of Aviation Fatigue. Current Edition.
Washington, D.C.: Federal Aviation Administration.
38. Wilkinson, R.T. “Sleep Deprivation.” The Physiology of Human Survival. Eds.
O.G. Edholm and A. Bacharach. New York: Academic Press, 1965. 399-430.
39. Wylie, C.D., T. Shultz, J.C. Miller, M.M. Mitler, and R.R. Mackie. Commercial Motor
Vehicle Driver Fatigue and Alertness Study: Project Report. Report No.:
FHWA-MC-97-002. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Transportation, 1996.
A-3
Advisory Circular Feedback Form
If you find an error in this AC, have recommendations for improving it, or have suggestions for
new items/subjects to be added, you may let us know by contacting the Flight Standards
Directives Management Officer at 9-AWA-AFB-120-Directives@faa.gov.
Subject: AC 120-115, Maintainer Fatigue Risk Management
Date: _____________________
Please check all appropriate line items:
An error (procedural or typographical) has been noted in paragraph ____________
on page _______.
Recommend paragraph _____________ on page __________ be changed as follows:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
In a future change to this AC, please cover the following subject:
(Briefly describe what you want added.)
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
Other comments:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
I would like to discuss the above. Please contact me.
Submitted by: Date: ______________________
