e
Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Circular
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: Developing and Implementing an Date: 05/17/13 AC No: 120-79A
Air Carrier Continuing Analysis and
Initiated by: AFS-300 Change: 1
Surveillance System
1. PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC) provides information for developing and
implementing a Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS). This AC is also a method
of compliance with certain 14 CFR regulatory requirements and provides information about the
FAA's expectations regarding your development and implementation of a CASS.
2. PRINCIPAL CHANGES. This change adds a note in Chapter 5, paragraph 5-2, regarding
related information that can be found in AC 39-9, Airworthiness Directives Management
Process.
PAGE CONTROL CHART
Remove Pages Dated Insert Pages Dated
Page 23 9/7/10 Page 23 05/17/13
f0?-f^
Isl for
John M. Allen
Director, Flight Standards Service
Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation Circular
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: Developing and Implementing an Date: 09/07/10 AC No: AC 120-
Air Carrier Continuing Analysis and Initiated by: AFS-300 79A
Surveillance System
Change:
FOREWORD
This advisory circular (AC) provides information on methods of developing and implementing a
Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS) required for commercial operators and air
carriers certificated under Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 119 and
conducting operations under either 14 CFR part 121 or 135. A CASS is a system that air carriers
and commercial operators use to monitor, analyze, and optimize the performance and
effectiveness of their air carrier maintenance programs.
The regulations in part 121, § 121.373 and part 135, § 135.431 that define CASS are written in a
performance-based format. Performance-based regulation is a regulatory approach that focuses
on measurable outcomes, rather than prescriptive processes, techniques, or procedures.
Performance-based regulation leads to defined results without a specific direction or specific
instruction in the regulation regarding how to obtain those results.
This AC describes methods of compliance with the performance-based CASS regulatory
requirements that the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has found to be acceptable. This
AC describes processes, techniques, and procedures that will lead to the defined results in the
CASS regulation. The information in this AC is not mandatory and does not constitute a
regulation. This AC does not include any material that imposes, reduces, or changes a regulatory
burden on anyone. Because using the method of compliance presented in this AC is not
mandatory, the term “should” used herein applies only if you choose to follow these particular
methods. A CASS should be tailored to each particular and specific operation; therefore, this AC
cannot provide a single means of compliance that applies to all certificate holders required to
develop and implement a CASS.
When “must” or “will” are used in this AC, such use reflects actual regulatory requirements.
When “you” or “your” is used in this AC, it refers to an air carrier or commercial operator.
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Paragraph Page
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1-1. Purpose...............................................................................................................................1
1-2. Applicability.......................................................................................................................1
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON CASS
2-1. History of the CASS...........................................................................................................3
2-2. Relevant Regulations..........................................................................................................3
2-3. Standard Definitions Used in CASS...................................................................................4
2-4. Purpose of a CASS.............................................................................................................6
2-5. Structure of a CASS...........................................................................................................6
CHAPTER 3. USING THIS AC TO DESIGN A CASS
3-1. Types of Operators this AC Helps....................................................................................11
3-2. Approach of this AC.........................................................................................................11
CHAPTER 4. CASS IN YOUR ORGANIZATION.........................................................................
4-1. CASS Documentation.......................................................................................................13
4-2. Written Policy and Procedures.........................................................................................13
CHAPTER 5. MAJOR CASS ACTIVITIES
5-1. Summary of a CASS.........................................................................................................15
Figure 5-1. The Four Basic CASS Activities: Surveillance, Analysis, Corrective Action,
Followup.........................................................................................................................15
5-2. Verifying Performance of your Maintenance Program....................................................16
Figure 5-2. Risk Management Process...........................................................................16
5-3. Verifying the Effectiveness of your Maintenance Program.............................................25
5-4. Final RCA and Corrective Action....................................................................................28
5-5. Followup...........................................................................................................................34
CHAPTER 6. PERSONNEL WHO PERFORM CASS FUNCTIONS
6-1. Personnel Managing CASS Functions.............................................................................37
6-2. CASS Personnel Training and Experience.......................................................................37
Table 6-1. Subject Training............................................................................................39
iii
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
CONTENTS (continued)
Paragraph Page
CHAPTER 7. COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN YOUR CASS PERSONNEL AND OTHER
DEPARTMENTS
7-1. Communicating Specific CASS Results and Actions......................................................41
7-2. Educating Personnel on CASS.........................................................................................41
7-3. Communications with Personnel Outside the CASS........................................................42
CHAPTER 8. HOW YOUR CASS DIFFERS FROM AND RELATES TO OTHER
PROGRAMS
8-1. Summary of Other Programs............................................................................................45
8-2. Discussion of Individual Programs...................................................................................45
CHAPTER 9. HOW TO DETERMINE IF YOUR CASS IS WORKING PROPERLY
9-1. Why You Should Evaluate Your CASS...........................................................................49
9-2. Steps to Evaluate your CASS...........................................................................................49
CHAPTER 10. THE ROLE OF THE FAA IN RELATION YOUR CASS
10-1. The FAA’s Role, in General...........................................................................................53
10-2. The FAA PI’s Role.........................................................................................................53
CHAPTER 11. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
11-1. How to Obtain This and Other FAA Publications..........................................................55
APPENDIX 1. SAMPLE CASS FOR A LARGE CERTIFICATE HOLDER (8 pages)........1
APPENDIX 2. SAMPLE CASS FOR A MEDIUM CERTIFICATE HOLDER (6 pages).....1
APPENDIX 3. SAMPLE CASS FOR A SMALL CERTIFICATE HOLDER (6 pages)........1
APPENDIX 4. CASS MANUAL/DOCUMENT SAMPLE CONTENTS (2 pages).................1
APPENDIX 5. PUBLICATIONS USED TO DEVELOP THIS AC (2 pages).........................1
iv
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1-1. PURPOSE.
a. Applicability. This advisory circular (AC) provides information for developing and
implementing a Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS). This AC applies to you if
you are a Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 119 certificate holder
conducting operations under 14 CFR part 121 or 135. For part 135 operations, this AC applies if
you conduct your maintenance operations under part 135, § 135.411(a)(2). This AC also applies
to each person employed or used by you as a part 119 certificate holder for any maintenance,
preventive maintenance, and alteration of your aircraft. Title 14 CFR part 1, § 1.1 defines
“person” as “an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint-stock
association, or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative of any of them.”
b. Method of Compliance. This AC is a method of compliance with certain 14 CFR
regulatory requirements. This method of compliance has been found to be acceptable to the
Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Instead of following this method,
you may choose to follow an alternate or a different method. However, before you can use your
alternate or different method, the FAA must make a finding that your alternate method is
acceptable. Because using the method of compliance presented in this AC is not mandatory for
those choosing not to follow this method, the term “should” used herein applies only to those
who choose to follow this particular method.
c. FAA Expectations. This AC provides information about the FAA’s expectations
regarding your development and implementation of a CASS. As required by part 121,
§§ 121.373 and 135.431, your CASS monitors your maintenance program for compliance with
applicable requirements.
d. Maintenance. As used in this AC, “maintenance” means inspection, overhaul, repair,
alterations, preservation, and the replacement of parts. It is important to remember that your
inspection functions are an integral part of your maintenance program. They are not separate
from your maintenance program. This is consistent with the regulations.
1-2. APPLICABILITY.
a. Certificate Holders. The intended audience of this AC is any certificate holder that
develops a CASS, whether required to do so or not. The following table explains which
certificate holders must have a CASS and which certificate holders may choose to have one.
If you operate under 14 CFR— You—
Part 121 must have a CASS as required by
§ 121.373.
Part 129 must have FAA approval for the
maintenance program and may have a
CASS if it is consistent with the
regulations of the State of the operator.
Par 1-1 Page 1
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
If you operate under 14 CFR— You—
Section 135.411(a)(2) applicability must have a CASS as required by
§ 135.431.
Section 135.411(a)(1) applicability or may be interested in developing a CASS
part 91, 125, 133, or 137 because of the safety, efficiency, and other
benefits a CASS affords.
b. Individuals. This AC is useful if you are directly involved in developing and
implementing a CASS, or if you hold a senior management position where you exercise any
control over maintenance operations.
Page 2 Par 1-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 2. BACKGROUND ON CASS
2-1. HISTORY OF THE CASS. The CASS is one element of the Continuous Airworthiness
Program (CAP) that was introduced in a rulemaking at 29 Federal Register (FR) 6522 on May
20, 1964. The rulemaking responded to safety concerns and discoveries of weaknesses in the
maintenance programs of some air carriers revealed during accident investigations and FAA
surveillance of air carrier maintenance activities. The CAP was designed to strengthen systemic
requirements for safe air carrier operations. With its data collection, corrective action, and
followup functions, a CASS is critical to the highest possible degree of safety in air
transportation.
2-2. RELEVANT REGULATIONS.
a. Requirement to Have a CASS. This AC addresses certain key concepts in the CASS
regulations, portions of which are in the regulatory text quoted here for discussion later in this
AC. Title 14 CFR part 121, § 121.373(a), (b), and (c), and 14 CFR part 135, § 135.431(a), (b),
and (c) state:
“(a) Each certificate holder shall establish and maintain a system for the continuing
analysis and surveillance of the performance and effectiveness of its inspection
program and the program covering other maintenance, preventive maintenance, and
alterations and for the correction of any deficiency in those programs, regardless of
whether those programs are carried out by the certificate holder or by another person.
“(b) Whenever the Administrator finds that either or both of the programs described in
paragraph (a) of this section does not contain adequate procedures and standards to
meet the requirements of this part, the certificate holder shall, after notification by the
Administrator, make any changes in those programs that are necessary to meet those
requirements.”
NOTE: The wording of § 135.431(a) and (c) is the same as that in
§ 121.373(a) and (c). There are slight differences between the text of
§§ 135.431(b) and 121.373(b); however, they are substantively identical.
b. Requirement to Have a Maintenance Program.
(1) Regulatory Compliance. If you are a 14 CFR part 119 certificate holder
conducting operations under § 121.367 requires you to have a maintenance program that consists
of an inspection program and a program covering other maintenance, preventive maintenance,
and alterations. In accordance with § 135.425, the same requirement applies if you are a part 119
certificate holder conducting operations under part 135 and operating or choosing to operate
under § 135.411(a)(2) applicability.
(2) Elements of Your Maintenance Program. Your air carrier maintenance program
includes the following 10 elements:
• Airworthiness responsibility,
Par 2-1 Page 3
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
• Air carrier maintenance manual,
• Air carrier maintenance organization,
• Accomplishment and approval of maintenance and alterations,
• Maintenance schedule,
• Required Inspection Items (RII),
• Maintenance recordkeeping system,
• Maintenance providers,
• Personnel training, and
• A CASS.
NOTE: You can find additional, more detailed information about the
10 elements of a maintenance program in the current edition of AC 120-16,
Air Carrier Maintenance Programs.
2-3. STANDARD DEFINITIONS USED IN CASS.
a. Definitions.
(1) Audit. Scheduled or unscheduled formal reviews and verifications to evaluate
compliance with policy, standards, and/or contractual requirements.
(2) Authority. The power to design or change fundamental policy or procedures
without having to seek higher level management approval. Authority is permission; it is a right
coupled with an autonomous power to accomplish certain acts or to order others to act. Often,
one person grants another authority to act as an employer to an employee, a corporation to its
officers, or as a governmental empowerment to perform certain functions.
(3) Carried Out by the Certificate Holder or Other Person. This refers to your
ability as a certificate holder to accomplish maintenance yourself or to make arrangements with
someone else to accomplish maintenance on your behalf. However, you always retain the
responsibility for the performance of maintenance, and you must always maintain operational
control over any maintenance that any other person performs on your aircraft. Operational
control includes independently determining the scope and type of maintenance that may be
required, when to accomplish that maintenance, and if the maintenance was done in accordance
with your manual and program, regardless of who accomplished the maintenance.
(4) CASS. The elements of the system are always working. For example, continuing
surveillance means someone is always looking and collecting information. Continuing analysis
means that someone is always analyzing the information that the system is always collecting.
(5) Corrective Action. An action designed to eliminate or mitigate a deficiency that
has been identified within your maintenance program.
(6) Deficiency. A condition which is insufficient or incomplete, or where something
required is lacking. In a CASS, it is something that is missing from your maintenance program
that should be there, or it is something that is there but not producing the desired results.
Alternatively, it could indicate that your maintenance program documentation is not being
Page 4 Par 2-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
followed. For example, a program element that has failed and is not working, or a program
element that has faults and is not working as it should, are deficiencies.
(7) Effective. Producing or capable of producing a result. The maintenance program is
producing the desired results when it realizes the following objectives:
• Airworthy aircraft have been properly maintained for operations in air
transportation;
• Personnel are competent;
• Facilities and equipment are adequate; and
• All maintenance, preventive maintenance, and alterations are always performed
in accordance with your maintenance program and manual.
(8) Establish and Maintain. To establish means that you develop a CASS that is
appropriate for the type and scope of your operation. To maintain means that you keep your
CASS current and appropriate in response to changes in the type and scope of your operation.
(9) Maintenance Program. The programs outlined in §§ 121.367 and 135.425 are
outlined in other sections of part 121 subpart L and part 135 subpart J, and the current edition of
AC 120-16 describes them in some detail.
(10) Maintenance. Inspection, overhaul, repair, preservation, and the replacement of
parts, excluding preventive maintenance.
(11) Performance. The act of doing something successfully; the successful execution of
an action. In CASS, performance means your maintenance program is being accomplished or
executed as outlined in your air carrier manual.
(12) Person. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint-stock association, or governmental entity. It includes a trustee, receiver, assignee, or similar
representative of any of them.
(13) Preventive Action. Action to eliminate or mitigate the cause or to reduce the effects
of potential nonconformity or other undesirable situation.
(14) Program. An organized list of procedures.
(15) Responsibility. The obligation to ensure that a task or function is successfully
carried out. Responsibility includes accounting for actions related to the task or function. This is
a key attribute of operational control.
(16) Risk. Risk is the degree of probability that hurt, injury, or loss will occur over a
specific period of time or number of operational cycles. Risk has two elements: severity and
likelihood. With regard to air carrier maintenance operations standards, the relationship between
these two elements must be inverse.
Par 2-3 Page 5
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
(a) Severity is the type of harm inflicted if a particular event occurs. For air carrier
maintenance programs, severity should be expressed in qualitative terms as a consequence of
failure, such as catastrophic, hazardous, etc.
(b) Likelihood is the estimated probability or frequency, in quantitative or
qualitative terms, of an occurrence related to the hazard; it is an expression of the probability that
a specific unsafe event will occur. Likelihood is always an estimate.
(17) Risk Mitigation. A risk control measure. It refers to the process of modifying the
system in order to reduce the risk.
(18) Risk Management. A formal process composed of identifying hazards, analyzing
risk, assessing risk, and controlling risk. This process, embedded within the processes used to
provide the product/service, is not a separate process.
(19) Root Cause Analysis (RCA). The analysis of deficiencies to determine their
underlying root cause.
(20) System. A functionally related group of elements. In CASS, the elements are:
• Surveillance,
• Analysis,
• Corrective action, and
• Followup.
2-4. PURPOSE OF A CASS.
a. High Level Purpose. If you do not accomplish your maintenance program according to
your manuals and applicable requirements, or if your maintenance program itself has
deficiencies, your aircraft might be approved for return to service (RTS) when it is not airworthy.
The high-level purpose of a CASS is to reduce or eliminate the likelihood of your aircraft being
approved for RTS when it is not airworthy through the continuous, system safety-based,
closed-loop cycle of surveillance, investigation, data collection, analysis, corrective action,
monitoring, and feedback of a CASS.
b. CASS Design. The FAA expects you to design your CASS to ensure that you conduct
your maintenance program according to regulations and your manuals, and that your program is
effective in achieving the desired result of consistently having airworthy aircraft approved for
RTS. For the CASS to yield this safety benefit, the FAA expects your senior management to
establish safety as its top organizational priority. All personnel need to embrace your
organizational goals and act jointly to achieve them.
2-5. STRUCTURE OF A CASS.
a. Overall Objective. The overall objective of the air carrier regulations governing
maintenance programs is to ensure that you maintain at least the level of safety originally
designed into an aircraft and that each aircraft used in air transportation is always in an airworthy
condition.
Page 6 Par 2-3
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
b. Questions a CASS Addresses. There are two basic questions the regulations require a
CASS to address:
(1) Are you following your maintenance program as you have documented in your
maintenance manuals and procedures? The CASS of the performance of a maintenance program
refers to the process of collecting and evaluating information to determine that the execution of
the maintenance program is done according to the regulations, your manuals, and other
applicable requirements. This portion of the CASS consists of conducting audits and analyzing
audit findings and trends to verify that you are following your maintenance program as you have
written it and are properly performing maintenance on your aircraft. The analysis conducted in
this area of your CASS should also identify weaknesses, if any, in the systems and procedures
used to carry out your maintenance program.
(2) In following your manuals and procedures, are you producing the results that you
want? The CASS of the effectiveness of the maintenance program refers to the process of
collecting and evaluating operational data that you need to verify that your maintenance program
is producing the desired results.
(a) Under the regulations, your primary desired results should be those defined
results found in §§ 121.367 and 135.425. There are three:
1. You, or any of your maintenance providers, perform all maintenance,
preventive maintenance, and alterations in accordance with your manual.
2. You and your maintenance providers provide competent personnel and
adequate facilities and equipment for the proper performance of maintenance, preventive
maintenance, and alterations.
3. Each of your aircraft released to service is airworthy and properly
maintained for operations in air transportation.
(b) Another desired result is that your aircraft operate with a level of reliability that
is consistent with the goals of your maintenance program. “Reliability” is a broad term in this
context and is an expression of dependability and the probability that an item, including an
aircraft, engine, propeller, or component, will perform its required function under specified
conditions without failure, for a specified period of time. Testing for effectiveness usually
consists of collecting and analyzing operational performance data, such as:
• Maintenance-related delays and cancellations,
• Failure rates of parts and components after they are approved for RTS,
• Discrepancy rates of aircraft after heavy maintenance, and
• Related trend analysis.
Par 2-5 Page 7
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
c. Correcting Deficiencies. The regulations require you to include, as part of your CASS,
provisions to correct any deficiencies in your maintenance program, regardless of whether your
maintenance program or any part of it is actually conducted by you or by your maintenance
provider. The regulations also provide authority for the FAA to require you to make necessary
changes in the program if you do not make them on your own.
d. Systems Safety. A well-structured CASS can assist you in taking a systems safety
approach to your maintenance program through recognition of the interaction of all the elements
within your program systems and subsystems. The systems consist of interrelated processes that
comprise of personnel, procedures, materials, tools, equipment, facilities, and software operating
in a specific environment to perform a specific task or to achieve a specific purpose, support, or
mission requirement for an air carrier.
e. Organizational Functions. An unairworthy aircraft can be the result of the actions of a
wide variety of organizational functions, in addition to those associated with maintenance. These
organizational functions include senior management decisions, flight operations, ground
operations, and others. An effective CASS would consider the potential role of these
organizational functions through effective surveillance and complete RCA. Chapter 5,
paragraphs 5-2 through 5-4 covers these issues in greater detail.
f. System Safety Categories. When performing their surveillance and analysis functions,
we encourage individuals responsible for a CASS to use the system safety categories of safety
attributes, safety culture, communication, accountability, training programs, and potential
problem areas when identifying hazards and managing risks. The FAA defines safety attributes
as the following:
(1) Authority. You have a clearly identifiable, qualified, and knowledgeable individual
with the authority to establish and modify your CASS or a process within your CASS. Authority
means the power to design or change fundamental policy or procedures without having to seek a
higher level approval. Authority is permission; it is a right coupled with an autonomous power to
accomplish certain acts or order others to act. Often one individual grants another authority to
act, such as an employer to an employee, a corporation to its officers, or a governmental
empowerment to perform certain functions.
(2) Responsibility. You have a clearly identifiable, qualified, and knowledgeable
individual who is accountable for the quality and accomplishment of your CASS or a process
within your CASS. Responsibility means the obligation to ensure a task or function is
successfully carried out. Responsibility includes accountability for the action to carry out a task
or function. There is overall responsibility and direct responsibility.
(3) Procedures. You have documented methods for accomplishing a process. The
procedure description should answer the basic questions of who, what, when, where, and why, as
appropriate.
(4) Controls. You design checks and restraints into a process to ensure you get the
results that you want. Controls may not be necessary for every process; however, if a process is
Page 8 Par 2-5
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
critical to meeting your overall system goals, specific controls to ensure proper accomplishment
of that process generally are indicative of a well-designed system.
(5) Process measurement. This is where you measure and assess your processes to
identify and correct problems or potential problems. You should identify specific measures and
the data that you require to be collected.
(6) Interfaces. You identify and manage the interactions between processes, and the
interfaces between your CASS and other systems or programs, whether within or outside your
maintenance organization.
g. Risk Management. System safety and, therefore, CASS functions are built around
principles of what is commonly referred to as risk management. Risk has two elements: severity
and probability. Risk management includes identifying hazards, evaluating how severe the
hazards’ consequences would be, and how likely they are to occur (probability). After you do
that, you can develop, implement, and evaluate measures to address the identified risks and
program deficiencies throughout a system’s life cycle to achieve the level of risk that you deem
acceptable. All operators currently perform these functions on some level, although the degree of
formality and sophistication depends on the size and scope of the operation as well as the level of
training your personnel have in risk management. In your CASS, the FAA expects a formal risk
management process (system safety) with safety, regulatory, and program compliance as the top
priorities. Your formal risk management process should be structured, but not necessarily
complex or expensive.
h. Safety Enhancement versus Disciplinary Action. The intention of a CASS is to give
you (and the FAA) a realistic picture of the frequency and nature of deficiencies occurring in
your maintenance program, and the opportunity to correct them. If your personnel at any level
perceive that their jobs are at risk by collaborating in this system, they are likely to withhold
information or bias the analysis for self-protection. You should design your CASS to emphasize
the end goal of enhancing safety by evaluating and improving your maintenance program. You
should not carry out your analysis and surveillance so that others perceive it or its intention as a
method of identifying individuals who have committed errors simply to take some sort of
disciplinary action. Human error is inevitable, but the question for your CASS to answer is how
to better design your maintenance program to preclude errors from encroaching on operational
safety or resulting in noncompliance.
i. Complacency. A particular challenge for your CASS is to overcome complacency that
may be caused by the high degree of redundancy and dependability in modern aircraft systems.
You need to place high priority on the CASS of your maintenance program because the potential
consequences of deficiencies in your programs can be very serious.
j. Unique Program. Because of the wide range of size and aircraft types of air carriers, it
would be unrealistic to set forth a single means of compliance for all to follow. Just as each of
you have your own maintenance procedures manuals, each of you should have your very own
unique CASS. You should design your CASS appropriate to the size and sophistication of your
operation. This is consistent with the performance-based regulatory approach described in the
second paragraph of the Foreword of this AC.
Par 2-5 Page 9 (and 10)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 3. USING THIS AC TO DESIGN A CASS
3-1. TYPES OF OPERATORS THIS AC HELPS.
a. Types of Operators. The CASS applies to many types of operators, ranging from small
operators of one or two propeller-driven aircraft, to operators with several hundred turbojet
aircraft. Your aircraft may include helicopters or airplanes, and you may provide scheduled or
unscheduled service and operate under 14 CFR part 121, part 135, or both. These factors have a
significant effect on the size and structure of your maintenance organization. Additionally, if you
conduct operations under 14 CFR part 91, 125, 129, 133, 135 (part 135, § 135.411(a)(1)
applicability), or 137, you may also find the information in this AC useful if you decide to
implement a CASS. If, under your operation, the regulations do not require you to have a CASS,
you do not have to obtain FAA approval or authorization to develop or use a CASS as long as
the use of a CASS does not conflict with any of the regulations that you must comply with.
b. Personnel Assigned to Accomplish CASS-Related Duties. In addition, you should be
aware that a primary difference in CASS design between air carriers involves the number of
personnel assigned to accomplish CASS-related duties. If you are a smaller certificate holder,
you may assign fewer personnel and may have to draw upon personnel that you normally have
assigned to other functions to fulfill CASS functions on a collateral duty basis. You may even
need to use outside resources such as contract personnel to supply special expertise or
independent review if your organization lacks the necessary special skills or training, or if you
have an insufficient number of personnel to fulfill your CASS functions. If you are a larger
certificate holder, you may have a significant number of personnel assigned full-time to CASS
functions.
3-2. APPROACH OF THIS AC.
a. Main Text. This AC primarily addresses the functions of a CASS. The main text of this
AC (chapter 5) presents the basic functions that you should have in any CASS.
b. Appendices 1, 2, and 3. In appendices 1, 2, and 3, we present examples of how three
different types of operators might accomplish these CASS functions and satisfy the
requirements. The intention of these examples is to show the different ways to comply; they are
not a menu from which you may select a CASS. Rather, the intention of the examples is to
demonstrate how you might design a CASS suitable for your particular, unique operation. Each
appendix contains descriptions of procedures based on likely available resources for a different
type and size of certificate holder. For example, if you are a smaller, on-demand air carrier
operating under part 135 with two SAAB 340B airplanes, you probably meet the requirements in
essentially the same way as a small certificate holder operating one Boeing 737 under part 121.
You will need to develop your own procedures and use the terminology (for example,
designating the personnel or organizations involved in different aspects of the CASS) that best fit
your particular and unique operation. For that reason, any job titles in this AC are for illustration;
they are not requirements or even recommendations.
Par 3-1 Page 11
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
c. Appendices 4 and 5. Appendix 4 is a list of sample CASS manual/document contents.
Appendix 5 lists related publications and the publications that we used as reference material or
source documents to produce this AC.
Page 12 Par 3-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 4. CASS IN YOUR ORGANIZATION
4-1. CASS DOCUMENTATION. You should describe your CASS policy and procedures in
writing. You can produce these documents in a paper or electronic form, or another comparable
record. For example, you could put them in a detailed chapter or section within your general
maintenance manual or you could put them in a separate CASS manual associated with your
general maintenance manual. In all cases, your policy and procedures should be written and not
simply be verbal understandings.
4-2. WRITTEN POLICY AND PROCEDURES. Your CASS policy and procedures should:
a. Recognize CASS as a Coordinated System. You should recognize and treat your
CASS as a coordinated system rather than just audit and data collection activities dispersed
within your maintenance program. You do not have to contain your CASS personnel within a
single department or office. However, your policy and procedures should identify all functions
related to your CASS. You should not assume that because an audit or data collection function
exists somewhere within your organization, it automatically satisfies your CASS requirement
with no further coordination necessary.
b. Identify Major Programs. It should identify any programs, such as an optional
reliability program, that you use to satisfy a major portion of your CASS. Your CASS
documentation may refer to the documentation for that other program rather than restate the
documentation again in another manual. The relationship/interfaces between the CASS and that
other program should be clear and address responsibility and feedback issues to ensure that the
other program meets CASS objectives.
c. Address Communication and Coordination Needs. It should address the need for
fluid communications and coordination among the individuals who you have assigned authority,
responsibility, and duties related to your CASS.
d. Address Principles of System Safety. You should base it on principles of system
safety.
e. Identify Positions of Authority and Responsibility. It should clearly identify the
positions within your maintenance organization with authority and responsibility for the CASS.
Remember that authority means permission and responsibility means obligation. Consistent with
the system safety attributes, you must identify a position that has autonomous decision-making
authority for your overall CASS process. There also must be a position that has, or positions that
have, direct responsibility for carrying out the various functions of your CASS. If you have a
larger organization, you may have a number of positions that have direct responsibility for
carrying out functions of your CASS. However, there should be only one position that has the
autonomous decision-making authority to authorize change for any of the CASS procedures for
the CASS activities or functions.
(1) Authority. For purposes of this AC, “authority,” with regard to a CASS, means the
power to create or modify fundamental policies or procedures without higher level review or
approval. The individual with authority for the CASS may design or change the CASS without
Par 4-1 Page 13
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
having to seek approval from a higher level of management. The CASS procedures should
include how to modify the CASS.
(2) Responsibility. For purposes of this AC, “responsibility,” with regard to a CASS,
means an obligation, with the expected accountability, for ensuring that others successfully
accomplish tasks and functions in accordance with applicable policies, procedures, and
standards. The person with direct responsibility may directly accomplish this work, or you may
delegate the work. The individual with overall responsibility for your CASS has the obligation to
carry out the functions of the CASS, including overseeing and managing any personnel to whom
you have delegated CASS functions and duties. If your organization is smaller where personnel
share duties and only carry out CASS functions part-time, this oversight and management
responsibility relates only to those part-time tasks.
(a) You should designate a single person or position within your organization with
the overall authority for your CASS, and you should designate an individual, position, or
management committee within your organization with overall responsibility for managing and
implementing your CASS. If you are a small certificate holder, an individual may have both
authority and responsibility for CASS activities. That individual might also have responsibility
for other functions as well as the CASS. It would be common for the person with overall
responsibility for CASS functions to delegate some or much of this work to others within your
organization, depending on the size and staffing of the certificate holder. The FAA expects you
to assign clear responsibility for your CASS activities so that you do not end up with a
fragmented system with a high risk of confusion over who is responsible for a given task.
(b) You should ensure that personnel with CASS responsibilities and duties are as
independent as possible from the day-to-day operations of your maintenance program. Ideally,
personnel conducting audits would work in separate departments from the departments
performing your actual maintenance activities. However, if you are a small certificate holder, this
may not necessarily be feasible. If you are a small certificate holder, personnel performing your
CASS functions, particularly audits, may consist of one or more of the following:
1. “Borrowed” personnel from other shops or departments. Your procedures
should include ways to avoid having these individuals assigned to audit areas where they
normally work.
2. The company owner or chief executive officer (CEO), particularly if there
are no other employees and the CASS audits focus on outside vendors and maintenance
providers because maintenance providers accomplish all or most of your actual maintenance
work.
3. Outside resources that you make arrangements with to perform audits and
analysis for you.
4. Others that you have determined are qualified to provide independent audit,
operational data collection, and analysis services that fulfill the requirements of a CASS as
described in this AC.
Page 14 Par 4-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 5. MAJOR CASS ACTIVITIES
5-1. SUMMARY OF A CASS. The regulations require that your CASS accomplish
surveillance and analysis of all elements of your maintenance program from two perspectives:
verifying performance and verifying effectiveness. There are four activities in the CASS process:
surveillance, analysis, corrective action, and followup. You can carry out the first two activities
(surveillance and analysis) in two different ways. One audit-based, and the other is operational
data and collection and analysis-based. The results of the two types of surveillance and analysis
feed into the third and fourth major CASS activities: corrective action and followup. Figure 5-1
summarizes the flow of the four basic activities of CASS, which paragraphs 5-2 through 5-5
describe in further detail.
FIGURE 5-1. THE FOUR BASIC CASS ACTIVITIES:
SURVEILLANCE, ANALYSIS, CORRECTIVE ACTION, FOLLOWUP
Verify Performance of Maintenance Verify Effectiveness of Maintenance
Program Program
1a. Surveillance: Audit process. 1b. Surveillance: Data collection process.
- Create an audit plan based on risk - Select data sets.
assessment. - Collect operational data.
- Perform work-in-progress audits. - Collect failure data.
- Perform transaction audits. - Identify trends, anomalies, and potential
- Perform systems audits. hazards.
- Identify hazards.
2a. Analysis: Identify hazards and 2b. Analysis: Identify hazards, investigate
accomplish risk analysis and assessment. adverse indicators, and accomplish risk
analysis and assessment.
3. Corrective Action: Accomplish Root Cause Analysis (RCA); develop, implement,
and monitor a corrective action plan, as appropriate.
4. Followup (Performance Measurement): Verify the corrective action is effective,
and initiate risk-based followup surveillance planning, as appropriate.
a. Risk Management in CASS.
(1) In concert with the attributes of a good organization, you should prioritize personnel
and resources for CASS as part of the overall risk management process. Risk management
facilitates the balancing act between assessed risks and practical risk mitigation.
(2) Risk management serves to focus safety efforts on those hazards posing the greatest
risks. Essentially, any methodology used to prioritize surveillance personnel and resources
(as well as to formulate corrective action decisions later in the process) involves principles of
risk management.
(3) A formal risk management process is composed of the following elements:
identifying hazards, analyzing risk, assessing risk, and controlling risk. This process, embedded
within the processes used to provide the product/service; it is not a separate process. The flow
Par 5-1 Page 15
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
chart in Figure 5-2 summarizes an overview of the risk management process. The elements of a
risk management process encompass the four major CASS activities (Figure 5-1).
FIGURE 5-2. RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS
5-2. VERIFYING PERFORMANCE OF YOUR MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.
a. Surveillance of the Performance of Your Maintenance Program.
(1) Definition of a CASS “Audit.” Your main tool for assessing whether you are
properly performing (executing) your maintenance program is audits, particularly
work-in-progress audits. Work-in-progress audits are consistent with the plain language meaning
of “performance” found in 14 CFR part 121, § 121.373 and 14 CFR part 135, § 135.431. The
main direction of your audits should address your maintenance program objectives found at
§§ 121.367 or 135.425, as appropriate. For purposes of CASS, a CASS audit is a formal
examination of the activities of a department or area of your maintenance program based on an
established standard such as the regulations or your manual. The intention of work-in-progress
Page 16 Par 5-1
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
audits is to ensure that your maintenance personnel, as well as your maintenance providers,
comply with your manual, program, and all other requirements.
(2) Audit Procedures. You should have written procedures to guide your auditing
process, including the scheduling of audits. The CASS addresses both internal audits and
external audits. Internal audits are audits that you conduct within your organization. External
audits are audits that you conduct of vendors who supply parts and services to you. Your CASS
procedures should include a methodology for determining priorities and for establishing and
adjusting audit cycles (for example, 12, 18, 24, 36-month cycles) so that you focus your
resources on the most pressing issues. This is a risk assessment and risk management process.
(See paragraph 5-2(a)(3) for further explanation of risk assessment and risk management.)
(a) Although the majority of the generated inputs to this process are internal, one
additional input may be the result of outside audits conducted by entities other than yourself or
your maintenance providers. For example, the results of audits or inspections conducted by the
FAA or the Department of Defense (DOD) may be useful by providing you with:
• Specific findings requiring RCA and possible corrective action
(activities discussed later in this AC), and
• Information useful in focusing your own audits and operational data
collection.
(b) You may approach this initial scheduling task in many different ways, ranging
from resource allocation based on company experience and very basic analysis to the use of a
sophisticated, software-supported risk analysis process. Within this range of possible
methodologies, your CASS procedures should contain a process to systematically make those
decisions that are compatible with the size and complexity of your operations. The FAA
encourages you to make this process as structured as possible. You should place priority first on
safety and regulatory compliance, and second on issues of operational efficiency. However, if
your CASS is effective, you will meet all three of these objectives.
(3) Prioritizing Surveillance Resources. Essentially, any methodology that you select
to prioritize your surveillance resources (as well as to formulate corrective action decisions later
in the process) involves principles of risk assessment. Risk assessment is a concept applicable in
many aspects of an aviation operation. (See FAA Order 8040.4, Safety Risk Management, for
additional information.) Order 8040.4 is an example and is not the only source of risk assessment
procedures. However, it provides insight into FAA expectations. The FAA encourages operators
to incorporate the principles of this systematic process to:
• Establish a plan, including the scope of the process and priorities (for example,
detect and prevent noncompliance);
• Specify the areas of concern for surveillance and analysis (personnel, the
maintenance program and organization, operations, aircraft, facilities, and
systems);
• Identify hazards or potential threats to the operation;
• Determine how likely the consequences of a hazard will occur and actually
cause harm;
Par 5-2 Page 17
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
• Determine the severity of the consequences, for a realized hazard;
• Express a combination of the likelihood and severity of harm as “risk;” and
• Evaluate the appropriate response to the identified risk.
(a) Your CASS should take into account four principal potential sources of hazards:
1. Personnel (hiring, capabilities, competence, interaction, and human factors),
2. Equipment (design, maintenance, logistics, and technology),
3. Workplace (environment, sanitation, and user friendly), and
4. Organization (safety culture, authority, responsibility, standards, procedures,
and controls).
(b) There are a number of quantitative and graphical tools that exist to help you
determine the gradations of a risk (high, medium, low) based on the likelihood of an unwanted
event occurring and the severity of the consequences if it does occur. In the initial steps of your
CASS process, the appropriate response involves setting surveillance priorities based on risk
assessments aimed at maintaining compliance and safety in maintenance activities. Your CASS
risk assessment, through the feedback loop, helps you to set the audit and data collection
priorities that enhance the focus of surveillance. An interdisciplinary team, guided by your CASS
management but involving representatives from relevant technical areas, can best accomplish
this process.
(c) To identify the areas to audit and in order to set priorities, you should consider
factors in outside reports. These could include results of inspections, reports, special studies, or
audits conducted by outside entities such as the FAA, DOD, Department of Transportation
(DOT), DOT Office of the Inspector General (OIG), or National Transportation Safety Board
(NTSB). Outside reports may address:
• Information specific to you or your maintenance providers,
• Information related to the industry as a whole and of interest to you, or
• Relevant information about an accident, incident, or equipment type.
(4) Audit Materials. You should provide your CASS auditors with checklists to ensure
consistency and completeness of audits. However, you should permit your auditors that
flexibility necessary to ask questions not contained on the checklist if he or she finds an area that
requires further investigation.
(5) Areas Requiring Auditing. The CASS monitors all 10 elements of your
maintenance program. The following are examples of some, but not all, of the areas within each
element of your maintenance program that the CASS looks at. You should note that all of these
items are predisposed to surveillance of the maintenance program performance function of the
CASS, accomplished through audits.
(a) Airworthiness Responsibility.
Page 18 Par 5-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
1. As an air carrier, you are primarily responsible for the airworthiness of your
aircraft as well as the performance of maintenance, including work done by maintenance
providers, on your aircraft. You must ensure that all completed maintenance, including work
done by outside persons, is in accordance with your maintenance program and maintenance
manual.
2. Your air carrier certificate makes you a maintenance entity. Each person
who accomplishes maintenance on your aircraft does so as an agent on your behalf. Consistent
with the privileges and limitations of your air carrier certificate, you must, through your
maintenance organization, execute operational control over any maintenance activities anyone
accomplishes on your aircraft or any of its component parts. Such activities include determining
when maintenance is required, what maintenance is required, accomplishing the maintenance,
determining if the maintenance was done satisfactorily, and approving your aircraft for RTS.
Consistent with the regulations, you may not delegate this responsibility to anyone else,
including persons that you use for any of your maintenance, preventive maintenance, or
alterations.
(b) Manuals.
1. The content of all your manuals, including maintenance manuals and
technical content, is your responsibility. You may base your manuals on the Original Equipment
Manufacturer (OEM) manuals or other information, but regulations require you to use your own
manual, not the OEM manuals.
2. You should ensure that all of your manuals, publications, and forms are
useable, current, correct, and readily available to all personnel required to use them.
3. You should ensure that each person who is required to comply with your
manual must have access to it during performance of normal duties.
(c) Maintenance Organization.
1. Consistent with the responsibility described above, you must have a
maintenance organization that is able to effectively exercise and maintain operational control
over all persons performing, supervising, managing, and amending your maintenance program.
Your maintenance organization must be able to manage and guide your maintenance personnel
and provide the direction necessary to achieve your overall maintenance program objectives.
2. The individual with overall maintenance program authority and
responsibility is your Director of Maintenance (DOM), who should function as the accountable
manager for the maintenance program. Your organization must clearly identify this individual,
and he or she must be qualified in accordance with 14 CFR part 119, §§ 119.65 and 119.67(c) or
§§ 119.69 and 119.71(e), as appropriate. While retaining overall authority and responsibility,
your accountable manager may delegate direct responsibility for elements of the program as
appropriate for the size and structure of your maintenance organization.
3. Your air carrier manual must contain a chart or a description of your
maintenance organization showing clear authority and responsibility, including delegated
Par 5-2 Page 19
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
responsibility, for the overall maintenance program and all of its elements and functions. The
regulations also require you to include a description in your maintenance manual of the duties
and responsibilities for each position in your maintenance organization so that you do not end up
with a fragmented organizational system with high risk of confusion over who is responsible for
a given task.
4. In order to be effective, an adequate maintenance organization must be able
to demonstrate the following four organizational obligations:
• The obligation to define the environment within which individuals
conduct their tasks,
• The obligation to define the policies and procedures that individuals
must follow and respect,
• The obligation to allocate the resources that individuals need in order to
achieve your safety and production goals, and
• The obligation to investigate system failures and take all needed
remedial action to avoid a repetition.
5. Your maintenance organization will be predisposed to failure if you permit
the following failures to occur:
• Failure to understand the effect of people on the safety and reliability of
aircraft maintenance operations,
• Failure to organize your employees’ work,
• Failure to monitor your employees’ work effectively, and
• Failure to implement appropriate and effective corrective actions.
6. You must organizationally separate the performance of your RII function(s)
from the performance of your other maintenance (including inspection), preventive maintenance,
and alteration functions. This organizational separation must be below the level of the individual
who has primary responsibility for your RII function, as well as your other maintenance,
preventive maintenance, and alterations functions. In simple terms, this means that the part of the
maintenance organization that accomplishes your maintenance, preventive maintenance, and
alterations functions cannot be the same part of your maintenance organization that accomplishes
your RII function. When implementing the organizational separation, do not confuse your
maintenance department with your maintenance organization. Your maintenance department and
your inspection department are both a part of your maintenance organization. The organizational
separation has to occur below the individual in your organization who has primary responsibility
for both the maintenance function and the required inspection function. This individual must be
qualified to make an airworthiness determination.
(d) Maintenance Schedule. Your maintenance schedule sets out the item, task, and
interval of your scheduled maintenance effort. You should ensure that you accomplish your
maintenance schedule as stated. The maintenance schedule should be task-based and
appropriately modified in accordance with the CASS data collection and analysis findings. Your
audits should find that your initial selection and the continuous validation of each scheduled
maintenance task and its associated interval is accomplished according to well-defined criteria
Page 20 Par 5-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
throughout the service life of the item, system, or structure. Your maintenance schedule should
be primarily proactive and designed to permit the item, system, or structure to do what it is
designed to do.
(e) RIIs.
1. You must have specific procedures, standards, and limits necessary for the
acceptance or rejection of each your RIIs and for periodic inspection and calibration of precision
tools, measuring devices, and test equipment. You should note that the OEM’s manuals and
procedures do not contain RII procedures, standards, and limits. You must develop and
document these aspects yourself.
2. You must ensure that anyone who you authorize to accomplish RII
inspections is properly trained and qualified for each RII task that you authorize him or her to
perform.
3. You must ensure that any RII inspector understands that if he or she
performs an item of work, he or she may not perform a required inspection on that item.
4. You must ensure that the structure of your maintenance organization is
designed to organizationally separate the accomplishment of the required inspection function
from the accomplishment of the other maintenance, including other inspection, preventive
maintenance, and alteration functions.
5. You must ensure that your manual contains procedures to ensure that only
supervisory personnel of an inspection unit or the individual who has overall responsibility for
the RII function as well as the other maintenance, preventive maintenance, and alteration
functions may countermand the decision of any RII inspector regarding an RII.
(f) Maintenance Providers. You must ensure that all of your maintenance
providers and your suppliers are qualified and provide services and products according to your
maintenance program and manual. Other than location, there should be no difference between
the way your own employees and any of your maintenance providers complete work. Before you
identify any maintenance provider in your maintenance provider listing as an essential
maintenance provider, you should conduct an onsite audit that will permit you to determine that
each proposed essential maintenance provider has an adequate organization and provides
competent personnel and adequate facilities and equipment for the essential maintenance
intended.
(g) Personnel Training.
1. You must have means that you can use to determine that all of your
maintenance personnel, including maintenance provider personnel, are competent to accomplish
their duties.
2. You must have a training program for maintenance personnel (including
inspection personnel and maintenance provider personnel) who determine the adequacy of
accomplished maintenance.
Par 5-2 Page 21
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
3. Part of your maintenance program should ensure that your maintenance
personnel are competent to perform their duties.
(h) Accomplishment and Approval of Maintenance.
1. All of your maintenance facilities and equipment, including base and line
stations as well as all of your maintenance providers’ facilities and equipment, are adequate to
perform the maintenance. Other than scope and location, there should be no difference in the
standards for facilities and equipment between you and your maintenance providers.
• You properly store, dispense, identify, and handle parts and components.
• You and your maintenance provider properly calibrate your tools and
equipment.
• You identify requirements for specialized tools or training and provide
the tools and training.
2. You or your maintenance provider perform(s) maintenance and alterations
according to the methods, standards, and techniques specified in your manuals.
3. If you use an onsite representative to monitor work at a maintenance
provider, you should ensure that you have clear procedures for this individual to report and
document deviations from your manual or any of your methods, standards, and techniques
specified in your manuals.
4. You or other persons properly document work interruptions and deferred
maintenance in shift turnover records and accomplish them according to applicable procedures.
5. Major repairs and major alterations are properly classified, consistent with
the 14 CFR part 1, § 1.1 meaning of major alteration or repair, and accomplished in accordance
with FAA-approved technical data.
NOTE: During 1953, the Civil Aeronautics Authority (CAA) published a list
of repairs to specific parts, as well as specific types of repairs that were
considered major repairs in Civil Aeronautics Manual 18. This major repair
list was later adopted, unchanged, as part of 14 CFR part 43 appendix A. If
you rely exclusively on this standardized list of major repairs to make your
major/minor classification, you will end up classifying some minor repairs as
major and some major repairs as minor simply because the list has not been
updated to include evolving airplane design and construction techniques such
as composite structures, damage tolerant design, and the high speed
pressurized jet transport that did not exist in 1953.
6. Appropriately certificated mechanics or repairmen whom you have
authorized to do so, execute log entries and Airworthiness Release Forms.
7. You, or those you have authorized to do so, complete log entries and
Airworthiness Release Forms according to your written policies and procedures.
Page 22 Par 5-2
5/17/13 AC 120-79A CHG 1
(i) Maintenance Recordkeeping System.
1. You or other persons generate and retain maintenance records and current
status records in accordance with your manual procedures.
2. Maintenance records and current status records are complete and correct.
3. You or other persons appropriately evaluate, accomplish, and track
Airworthiness Directives (AD).
4. ADs with an alternative method of compliance (AMOC) and ADs that have
been reconfigured (undone) are appropriately evaluated for accomplishment and for other
modifications in the affected area (Supplemental Type Certificate (STC), major repairs, and
alterations), documentation, and tracked.
NOTE: The current edition of AC 39-9, Airworthiness Directives
Management Processes, provides you with additional information and
guidance on developing a management process to help you comply with part
39, Airworthiness Directives.
5. The maintenance recordkeeping system identifies life-limited parts and
tracks the current status time in service.
(j) CASS.
1. Your CASS ensures that you or other persons properly execute all elements
of your maintenance program and that they are consistently effective by design rather than by
chance.
2. Senior management reviews CASS issues on a regularly scheduled basis.
They hold meetings of CASS or maintenance management committees or boards on a regular
basis to discuss findings, analysis, and the progress of corrective actions. These meetings may
address events, as well as statistical data and trends.
(6) Objective of CASS Audits. Most of your CASS audits should be primarily
proactive, searching out potential problem areas in program execution before they result in
undesirable events. However, your CASS procedures may also be reactive when they address
how to direct audits in response to events or a series of events. For example, an analysis of
rejected takeoffs, unscheduled landings, in-flight shutdowns, or accidents or incidents may
indicate the need for special audits or surveillance. One of the activities of a CASS identifies
indications of program weaknesses or deficiencies through an analysis of trends. For example,
your CASS auditors would not necessarily investigate a single maintenance-related rejected
takeoff. A CASS would, however, consider whether that instance, coupled with other instances,
indicated a need to focus audits on a particular issue.
(7) Informal Communications Within a CASS. Your auditors and analysts should
maintain informal lines of communication with your personnel in the various maintenance
departments, so that your maintenance personnel can discuss concerns they may have. Through
Par 5-2 Page 23
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
this informal communications process, you can learn about potential hazards in your system. For
example, you may learn about an event that might have occurred but, because of some
intervention, did not. Your shop personnel know of this event, but it is otherwise difficult or
impossible to detect in routine audits. If you keep informal lines of communication open to your
shop personnel, your CASS may detect this near event. The FAA suggests that your CASS
procedures address how to encourage this type of communication and interaction.
b. Analysis of Audits.
(1) RCA. A risk assessment process tells you where to allocate resources and helps you
to understand what it finds. Your audit results should undergo risk assessment and preliminary
RCA to identify a deficiency or potential deficiency in any element of your maintenance
program. This preliminary analysis helps your CASS personnel determine the priority level that
the issue merits and what type of additional technical expertise it may need to complete the RCA
and to evaluate corrective action options.
(a) RCA treats errors as defects in the system rather than in an individual. RCA
looks beyond the symptom to find the organizational defect that permitted an error to occur. The
more thorough the analysis, the greater the likelihood you will uncover why the system
deficiency could occur, and how your organization can respond definitively. The RCA process
starts during the early part of an audit, as your auditors must collect information conducive to
later analysis. If your CASS is to uncover a procedural weakness, for example, your auditors
must collect information about the procedure. This should be factual and objective information,
not premature judgment about root cause. RCA is key to any complete CASS, even though
procedures may vary in complexity from certificate holder to certificate holder.
(b) An effective RCA can be as simple as asking and answering a question
(five times) about why something happened. For example, if there is a human error in a
maintenance process, the scenario could be as follows:
Question Answer
Why was the error made? The individual involved was not competent to do the work.
Why? The training department did not identify a training need for
this individual.
Why? The training needs identification process is very weak.
Why? The company has not identified the weakness in the training
needs process.
Why? The training department lost two experienced analysts last
year and has not replaced them.
(c) The above RCA leads to a training department workload problem. A superficial
analysis might have lead to disciplinary action against one individual, which is indicative of a
blame culture, and would, most likely, lead to a recurrence of the same error by a different
individual.
Page 24 Par 5-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
(d) A CASS should reflect your overall management philosophy and it should avoid
or discourage a “blame culture” within your maintenance organization. A blame culture:
• Fixes blame and moves on.
• Focuses on who made the error and their punishment.
• Encourages you to stop short of identifying:
• Systemic problems, or
• Root causes.
• Never permits you to fix the problem.
• Allows mishaps and mistakes to recur.
(e) RCA processes can range from the simple “five whys” above to the use of
complex commercially available RCA software.
(2) Objective of Audit Analysis.
(a) Analysis Process. The objective of this analysis is to allow you to address the
problem in such a way as to avoid a recurrence of the deficiencies. To the extent possible, you
should set forth the analysis process in the CASS documentation. Your analysis process should
be as objective as possible to avoid any tendency to promote individual or commercial interests.
You should also place priority on finding the systemic or root cause of a program deficiency over
seeking to assign personal blame, at any level of the organization, for an error. There is a
difference between accountability and culpability.
(b) System Deficiencies. While you should design your audits mainly to verify that
you are performing maintenance in accordance with your manual, the regulations, and applicable
requirements, your auditors and analysts should also be alert for system deficiencies. That is,
there may be procedures in your manual that you correctly follow, but which have become
outdated, conflict with other manual procedures, or for some other reason are in need of change.
You should encourage your auditors and analysts to be inquisitive and to think in terms of
“what if?” so that your CASS functions proactively, detecting problem areas or trends before
they lead to an accident, incident, or infraction of regulations. For example, what if event x
occurred in conjunction with observed condition y? This inquisitive type approach should
permeate your CASS organization, from determining audit priorities and scheduling, through
auditing and analyzing, and including monitoring and evaluating corrective actions.
(3) Managing Data from Audit Analysis. Your audit analysis process is not typically
as oriented toward quantitative analysis as the operational data analysis discussed below.
However, you may find it useful to manage the data through database or quantitative
applications. The FAA emphasizes that this approach does not have to be complicated or costly.
The level of formality and sophistication should match that of your organization.
5-3. VERIFYING THE EFFECTIVENESS OF YOUR MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.
a. Surveillance of the Effectiveness of Your Maintenance Program.
Par 5-2 Page 25
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
(1) Collecting Operational Data. The main tool for determining whether your
maintenance program is effective is to collect and analyze operational data that shows the
availability of the equipment, which should be one of the objectives of your maintenance
program. You should collect data that measures the output of your maintenance program. A
primary function or output of your air carrier maintenance program is to permit your equipment
(aircraft) to continue to do what it is supposed to do. Therefore, any activity (data) that shows
that your equipment is not available to do what it is supposed to do would be a prime indicator of
the level of maintenance program effectiveness. The level of unscheduled maintenance is such an
indicator. Other indicators that may be reflected in a requirement for unscheduled maintenance
are maintenance personnel not following the methods, techniques, and procedures in your
manual; facilities and equipment not being adequate for the work that is being performed; and an
aircraft being released to service when it is not airworthy.
(2) Types of Operational Data. Consistent with the performance-based CASS
regulation, the FAA does not intend to mandate the specific data that you should collect.
However, the FAA does expect you to have a process to ensure that the data that you do collect
is adequate to meet the intent of the CASS requirement and is useful. The FAA expects you to
use an effective selection and periodic review process. The FAA does not want you to collect
specific data elements that you do not use and that may not fit your particular situation. You can
collect operational data from two different activities: routine or unplanned (non-routine)
maintenance. However, you should keep any operational data that you collect from any
unscheduled work occurring because of planned/routine work separate from the data that is not a
result of planned/routine activities. Non-routine/unscheduled maintenance occurring as a result
of scheduled, planned maintenance activities is a normal activity. This is the time when you
should find discrepancies, and when you should accomplish the identified maintenance, not
when your aircraft are in an operational status carrying passengers and/or cargo.
(a) However, you should not consider unscheduled maintenance activities occurring
when your airplane is in an operational status carrying passengers and/or cargo as a normal and
acceptable activity. After all, a primary function of your scheduled maintenance program is to
permit your airplane to be available for operations in air transportation. Logically, a reduction of
availability of your aircraft to carry passengers and/or cargo as a result of unscheduled
maintenance activities is a primary indicator of the level of effectiveness of your maintenance
program.
(b) Some examples of routine operational data are:
• Corrosion prevention and control program findings,
• Repair assessment findings,
• Engine Condition Monitoring (ECM) information,
• Scheduled structural inspection findings,
• Repairs accomplished as a result of scheduled structural inspection findings,
• Scheduled maintenance findings,
• Repairs accomplished as a result of scheduled maintenance findings,
• Vendor or maintenance provider information,
• Component teardown reports, and
Page 26 Par 5-3
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
• Individual component failure rates.
(c) Examples of non-routine data are:
• Pilot reports, including maintenance deferred in accordance with the
minimum equipment list (MEL)/Configuration Deviation List (CDL);
• “Chronic” systems that have repeat write-ups in a specified time period
(for example, 10 to 15 days);
• Flight delays and cancellations related to maintenance issues;
• Service Difficulty Reports (SDR); and
• Unscheduled parts replacement or unscheduled maintenance.
(d) Operational data also includes reactive data collection and analysis responding
to such non-routine events as:
• Accidents and incidents;
• High-load events such as hard landings, turbulence, etc.;
• In-flight engine and propeller separations and uncontained engine failures;
• In-flight engine shutdowns;
• In-flight propeller featherings;
• Lightning strikes;
• Unscheduled landings caused by mechanical difficulties or malfunctions;
and
• Rejected takeoffs caused by mechanical difficulties or malfunctions.
(e) As with reactive audit surveillance, your CASS should generally approach these
types of problems from the analytical, systems perspective. For example, in response to one or
more rejected takeoffs, a CASS might focus the operational data collection and analysis to
determine if a pattern in rejected takeoffs was evident, or if it could examine other types of data
or information in relation to the rejected takeoff circumstance.
(f) The above data sets are only examples. Although the data sets focus on
equipment, this area of your CASS may also collect other types of data, such as information on
types of maintenance errors that you may have experienced.
(3) CASS Documentation. What you should include in your CASS documentation
regarding collection of operational data. Your CASS documentation should include a means of
identifying data that is relevant and useful for you to use in monitoring the effectiveness of your
specific and unique maintenance program. You should periodically review and reevaluate the
usefulness of the data that you collect and analyze to accomplish this portion of your CASS.
b. Analysis of Operational Data. Your CASS procedures should:
(1) Provide your analysts with an understanding of the potential significance of each
data set and how to process the data to understand its significance. This may require:
Par 5-3 Page 27
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
• Statistical analysis, such as comparing the frequency of certain events or
equipment failures with a determined norm; or
• Qualitative analysis, to evaluate reports of certain types of events.
NOTE: This process is not necessarily the same as that used in an
FAA-approved reliability program.
(2) Emphasize that analysis of operational data should consider root causes of negative
trends or anomalies. This preliminary RCA, including human factors, may require collaboration
with technical personnel in the affected areas or specialists in engineering and reliability
departments.
(3) Delineate the roles of your CASS analysts as well as other departments or personnel
in the analysis of operational data. You may decide to select a system that uses alerts or warnings
if results of your analysis exceed certain predetermined parameters. However, your CASS should
not rely completely on such alerts to the exclusion of your analysts’ judgment. In addition, the
use of alerts has historically been associated with parts and their failure rates, while current
maintenance methodology focuses on systems and the loss of function, not part failure rates. The
FAA’s expectation of your CASS in this regard is that you have a complete, written procedure to
review and analyze the operational data collected and to determine when further review is
necessary.
5-4. FINAL RCA AND CORRECTIVE ACTION. While the surveillance and analysis steps
differ for the verification of performance of your maintenance program versus verification of the
effectiveness of your program, the process merges when you respond to CASS findings. The two
types of analysis identify potential deficiencies in your maintenance program. In responding to
these findings and analyses, the objective of your CASS is to determine the root causes of your
program deficiencies and address them appropriately, regardless of the perspective from which
you found the deficiencies. Generally, the organizational area responsible for analysis will
present their results to your technical or production area with a preliminary analysis of the
collected information and, in some cases, possible underlying causes of the problem. Personnel
in your technical or production areas complete the RCA (if necessary) and develop proposed
corrective action alternatives.
a. Final RCA.
(1) Preparing for RCA.
(a) Analysis of audit findings or operational data requires you to evaluate
mechanical, human performance, or other data generated by your CASS in order to determine the
effectiveness of a process, maintenance practice, or equipment. In the case of operational data,
analysis begins with comparison of the data to a standard representing acceptable performance.
The standard may be in the form of an average or other means of calculating a reference. The
standard may be set by the FAA, industry common practice, or by you, the certificate holder, as
appropriate.
Page 28 Par 5-3
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
(b) Your CASS procedures should note that in performing RCA, you should
consider all relevant areas, including the role of your maintenance organization, your senior
management, and your policies, procedures, and communications.
(2) Applicability of RCA. RCA applies to both audit findings and operational data
analysis. For example, either audits or operational data analysis may point to maintenance errors
committed because of inadequate training or a confusing work card. Analysis should not stop
with simply correcting the work card or determining which mechanics were inadequately trained
and then training them. Rather, the analysis should determine why the work card got that way, or
why the training breach occurred and consider looking at other areas (including the role of your
maintenance organization and senior management), such as communications, staffing,
scheduling, or training program design that may be involved.
(3) Principles and Considerations of RCA. Principles and considerations of RCA are
closely related to those of risk assessment, particularly in terms of the thoroughness of the
analysis. Both processes consider not simply the person involved in an issue
(for example, the mechanic made a mistake), but all aspects of the organization and each
individual in that organization where that person works. This approach has the premise that
human error is a consequence rather than a deliberate action and, as such, proactive measures
and continuous reform of different aspects of the processes and organization can address latent
conditions in the system and increase the system’s resistance to operational hazards. The term
“latent conditions” refers to flawed procedures or organizational characteristics capable of
creating hazards if the right conditions or actions occur.
(a) Your RCA should consider two major areas:
1. Systems analysis plays an increasingly important role in CASS because of
the increasing complexity and variety of air carrier operations, equipment, and organizations.
Systems analysis emphasizes a harmonized approach to an enterprise, including specific written
procedures and planning for all activities, clearly established authority and responsibilities,
communications processes, and methods of measuring results, detecting system errors, and
preventing recurrence. This harmonized approach recognizes the wide range of interrelated
issues that are potentially associated with a problem in the system, such as management direction
and policies, communications, and pilot technique, in addition to the maintenance activities
themselves.
2. Human factors analysis begins with your maintenance organization itself. As
stated earlier in this AC, your maintenance organization:
• Defines the environment where your employees conduct their tasks.
• Defines the policies and procedures that your employees must follow
and respect.
• Allocates the resources that your employees need to achieve your safety
and production goals.
• Investigates system failures and takes all needed remedial action to
avoid a recurrence.
Par 5-4 Page 29
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
(b) Within your maintenance organization, human factors analysis looks at how
your employees communicate and perform in the work environment and then seeks to
incorporate that knowledge into the design of equipment, processes, and organizations. This
enhances safety and maximizes the human contribution, partly by designing systems to anticipate
the inevitability of human error. Human factors includes basic issues that can be addressed in
audit checklists, such as whether there is adequate lighting for maintenance personnel to perform
their work and whether schedules permit personnel to be properly rested. However, the human
factors discipline addresses a wider range of issues affecting how people interface with
technology and the operational system; how people learn about new or changed equipment,
technology, and documentation; and how people adapt to the general workplace environment.
(c) You, as an air carrier, should be aware that knowledge gained from human
factors can help you avoid maintenance errors, ensure that individuals’ initial skill sets match
task requirements, ensure that individuals maintain and improve their skills, and enhance the
work environment. This knowledge can help your CASS analysts perform RCA. Continuing with
the previous example of inadequate training, with insufficient awareness of human factors issues,
you might trace a maintenance error to a mechanic or technician who appears to have insufficient
training for the task, and determine that the solution is more technical training. However, further
analysis may reveal that there are contributing flaws in equipment design, job cards, manuals,
work environment, or such organizational procedures as shift turnover reports that more training
will not satisfactorily overcome. Or, it may turn out that a different kind of training, perhaps
involving decision-making skills, is called for.
(d) The FAA is involved in cooperative efforts with the industry and academia in
promoting human factors in aviation. This field is rapidly evolving, particularly in its application
to aviation maintenance. According to a study conducted for the FAA, maintenance error
contributes to a significant portion of air carrier accidents, with shift-turnover errors and work
interruptions standing out as leading types of underlying causes. Based on human factors’
growing importance and the human factors information available to the industry, the FAA
expects that you will apply concepts of human factors to your CASS surveillance and analysis.
(e) Your CASS surveillance should ensure that an RCA that considers human
factors is part of the investigation of individual events by any personnel designated by you to
respond to maintenance-related events, such as rejected takeoffs. Otherwise, data reviewed in a
CASS could be incomplete.
(f) One challenge presented by the increasing emphasis on human factors is how to
balance two seemingly contradictory purposes. On the one hand, the FAA and industry need to
encourage personnel to cooperate in addressing system organization and design issues without
inhibitions caused by fear of discipline or enforcement. On the other hand, in some cases,
individual employees or even senior management may bear a degree of culpability
(for example, in deliberately bypassing important controls or committing a serious regulatory
infraction in the commission of a maintenance error). In some instances, disciplinary action or
even FAA administrative or legal enforcement may be indicated. This is a common issue in the
industry. FAA programs designed to promote the greater good of the system, instead of the
blame culture described earlier, have become available. These programs encourage voluntary
reporting of errors and infractions by aviation personnel and operators without threat of
Page 30 Par 5-4
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
disciplinary action or penalty. Your specific CASS, in any event, should be concerned
specifically with identifying and correcting deficiencies in your maintenance program. You
should design your CASS with that objective in mind, rather than specific event resolution, even
if your CASS analysts research specific events.
b. Analytical Tools and Processes. While it is not necessary that you implement any
specific externally developed system, specific analytical tools or processes are available to assist
you in your analysis process. Examples of these follow:
(1) Maintenance Error Decision Aid (MEDA). Developed by the Boeing Human
Factors Engineering group in collaboration with the FAA, airlines, and the International
Association of Machinists, MEDA analyzes human performance issues related to maintenance
errors and trends. MEDA is used to track events, investigate and prevent maintenance errors, and
identify contributing factors, corrective actions, and prevention strategies. The group of
collaborators has also developed a software analysis package to work with this aid and facilitate
analysis of systemic issues.
(2) Managing Engineering Safety Health. Developed by the University of Manchester
in collaboration with British Airways (BA) Engineering. It is a system geared toward researching
the workplace and organizational environment in aircraft maintenance to find the issues with
greatest potential to contribute to human factors problems. The system uses software, diagnostic,
and sampling tools. Managing Engineering Safety Health conducts anonymous, survey-like
assessments among personnel at the work location, which are then analyzed. This is a more
structured, data-intensive approach to determining and monitoring personnel attitudes toward the
system than the interview process discussed earlier. The industry has far less practical experience
with Managing Engineering Safety Health than with MEDA.
(3) Human Factors Accident Classification System Maintenance Extension.
Developed by the U.S. Naval Safety Center in collaboration with the FAA for use in the air
carrier industry as well as naval aviation, this comprehensive system incorporates a number of
analytical tools and has profiled maintenance errors and contributing conditions, permitting
development of potential prevention measures. While the Human Factors Accident Classification
System Maintenance Extension may be more sophisticated than many operators would need, it
demonstrates principles and techniques of software-aided analysis that could apply to a CASS.
c. Corrective Action Options.
(1) Determining Whether or Not to Proceed with a Corrective Action. Once your
CASS auditors and analysts have identified a problem or deficiency, you must determine if a
corrective action is warranted and, if so, the details of the corrective action
(i.e., the corrective action plan).
(2) CASS Procedures. CASS procedures regarding the determination of whether you
should proceed with a corrective action. Your CASS procedures should outline:
• How such a determination will be made,
• Who will make the determination, and
Par 5-4 Page 31
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
• What levels of review, if any, you will perform. A review is a system safety
control.
(3) Developing a Corrective Action Proposal. Your technical area personnel should
have primary responsibility for developing the corrective action proposal, as they would be most
familiar with the technical workings of the area in question and would be sensitive to the
possibility of creating new problems as a result of the corrective action. Your CASS procedures
should emphasize a team approach. Team members should include your CASS auditors or
analysts, your technical area personnel in the affected maintenance disciplines, and perhaps other
affected areas such as training or flight operations.
(4) Types of Corrective Actions. There are several possible types of general corrective
actions or responses, depending on the outcome of your risk assessment:
(a) Prevent recurrence through engineering or system changes designed to eliminate
the risk.
(b) Accept the underlying cause of a trend or discrepancy, but reduce the risk
through implementing controls or countermeasures. Examples are training, policy or procedure
revisions, or warning devices. Other countermeasures might be modifying or introducing new
equipment or technology.
(c) Accept that under certain conditions a discrepancy may occur, but be prepared
to contain or mitigate the results of that situation. Your CASS does not necessarily have to
implement corrective actions for every apparently negative trend or finding. Analysis of findings
or trends may identify problem areas that do not present safety hazards that you are willing to
accept, in accordance with your risk assessment process. For example, you might find that a
higher than average number of component removals occur at a particular location with “no fault
found” as a consequence of a non-safety-related failure. You might determine that the reason for
this situation is that your aircraft spends insufficient time on the ground for line maintenance to
completely isolate the fault. You might prefer to continue the brief turn times and simply change
components. This would be a business decision for you to make. However, more comprehensive
corrective actions would be mandatory if your CASS detects that your maintenance program
lacks adequate procedures and standards to meet the requirements of part 121 or 135, as
applicable.
d. Written Procedures for Developing and Implementing Corrective Actions. Your
CASS should provide relatively detailed written procedures for developing and implementing
corrective action. Your written procedures should:
(1) Result in a specific corrective action plan that addresses the following:
• Development and proposal of the corrective action.
• Analysis and final approval level of the corrective action, including who is
responsible for approval of the corrective action.
• Who will implement the corrective action.
• How the responsible person will implement the corrective action.
Page 32 Par 5-4
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
• When the corrective action completion due date is.
• Who will evaluate the outcome and how, including identification of data
requiring collection, awareness of the possibility of unintended consequences,
and events that should trigger a response.
• Who will monitor the status of the corrective action and how.
• Reporting the status of the corrective action (to whom, with what frequency).
(2) Maintain the appropriate role of auditors in developing responses to findings, so that
they continue to remain independent from the corrective actions they may subsequently audit.
(3) Distinguish clearly between your technical area personnel’s responsibility for
developing and implementing corrective actions, and your CASS personnel’s responsibility for
producing the findings and analysis and making sure the technical area involved develops and
implements appropriate corrective actions.
(4) Designate the position or organization responsible for evaluating and approving
proposed corrective actions. Your CASS director or other designated manager may appoint a
corrective action team to design and propose a corrective action. The team—which typically
represents a cross section of the departments involved in audits, operational data collection,
analysis, and production—oversees the implementation of the corrective action. Technical and
reliability control boards are most often used in conjunction with FAA-approved reliability
programs; however, a similar concept applies to a CASS, even if no FAA-approved reliability
program exists.
e. Corrective Action Risk Assessment.
(1) CASS Procedures Regarding Risk Assessment. Your CASS procedures should:
(a) Specify that your personnel will analyze a proposed corrective action carefully
before its selection and implementation to ensure that corrective action is necessary and will
actually fix the problem and not lead to unintended, negative consequences.
(b) Remind both CASS and technical area personnel of the need to consider the
impact of the proposed corrective action on other aspects of your operation. This includes other
areas of your maintenance program, such as manuals. The corrective action may require
coordination with other areas, such as flight operations, that it could affect.
(2) Personnel Involved in Risk Assessment.
(a) Your technical area personnel play the key role in risk assessment, but the
process should include your CASS analysts, who will act as resources in support of your
technical area managers and bring risk assessment and systems analysis techniques to the
process. Your auditor and analyst should be qualified (through training or experience) in systems
analysis and can contribute to the evaluation of a proposed corrective action by determining if
the basic system elements have been considered. However, your technical personnel have the
expertise to actually develop and implement the corrective action, and to evaluate it in practical
Par 5-4 Page 33
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
terms. Thus, the corrective action is a result of cooperation between your technical personnel and
your CASS personnel.
(b) Personnel working on the proposed corrective actions should ensure they
consider issues of a timetable for the corrective action implementation, and the safety attributes
of authority, responsibility, procedures, controls, process measurement, and interfaces.
f. Corrective Action Plan.
(1) With the RCA complete, corrective action options identified, and risk assessment
performed as appropriate, you can make a final decision on the proposed corrective action plan.
The corrective action plan should address all relevant issues, including a timetable for
completion of the action, with milestones if appropriate. The appropriate technical department
and, if the corrective action goes beyond your maintenance organization, other departments
(such as flight operations) should then implement the plan.
(2) Your CASS procedures should identify:
• How this plan will be approved and at what level of your company.
• The parties responsible for implementing, monitoring, and ensuring that all
affected parties are notified, both within your maintenance organization and
externally, if necessary.
5-5. FOLLOWUP.
a. Corrective Action Followup. Your CASS procedures should:
(1) Specify how you will evaluate your corrective actions for effectiveness. That is, did
your corrective action do what you wanted it to do? This may require the following:
• Followup audits of a specific area,
• Regular communication from the affected technical area about the effects of the
corrective action and,
• Other forms of verification by your auditors or analysts tracking the
implementation.
(2) Identify the person or entity (such as a CASS board) responsible for determining if
any changes in the status of a corrective action are acceptable. Your CASS auditors or analysts
have the duty of ensuring that the person implementing the corrective action did so in accordance
with the established timetable, or, if not, determining why the timetable has changed.
(3) Include responsibilities and guidelines for:
• Tracking the implementation of corrective actions in accordance with the
timeline.
Page 34 Par 5-4
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
• The role of your auditors, managers, management committees, and senior
management.
• How your CASS will use automation or computerized systems.
• How your CASS will use risk assessment and systems analysis to guard against
unintended consequences.
• Measures to evaluate the effect of the corrective action.
• The affected technical area to communicate the status of the corrective action to
the person responsible for monitoring implementation.
b. Getting Help from a Manufacturer. In some cases, you may require data or assistance
from a manufacturer in correcting a deficiency detected by your CASS. Manufacturers may not
always assign these issues the same priority as you do. You should provide guidance in your
CASS procedures, based on your own particular experience, about how your CASS should
address assistance or information from manufacturers, and how to proceed in case of
unsatisfactory or slow responses. This may include developing a standardized letter citing the
need for this information or assistance to satisfy the requirements of § 121.373, § 135.431, or
other pertinent regulations. It may also include working with your FAA principal inspector (PI)
to find solutions.
c. Followup Surveillance Plan.
(1) Your CASS procedures should include how to determine the level of followup
audits for verifying corrective action implementation. For example, based on the risk assessment
or the complexity of your corrective action, the designated CASS analyst or team may schedule
special or more frequent audits. They may also change the data collection process or institute
other means of verification. The FAA expects you to have a well-defined and logical process to
design the followup actions.
(2) The information and analysis performed through the closed-loop, continuous cycle
of surveillance, investigations, analysis, and corrective action, permits you to refine your audit
and data collection priorities through the risk assessment process.
Par 5-5 Page 35 (and 36)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 6. PERSONNEL WHO PERFORM CASS FUNCTIONS
6-1. PERSONNEL MANAGING CASS FUNCTIONS.
a. Decision-making Group.
(1) Your CASS should include a decision-making group at a relatively high
organizational level to oversee or carry out your CASS functions. This oversight group could
include:
• Technical boards concerned with performance and other technical issues,
• Administrative boards that may have broader decision-making authority to act
on technical recommendations, or
• A single board combining both functions.
(2) The key concept is that there is a decision-making group at a relatively high level to
monitor your CASS and to make critical decisions in a timely manner. Typically, if you are a
smaller certificate holder, this committee or board might be composed of the president of the
company, and the DOM and flight operations. If you are a larger certificate holder, participants
might be managers from several departments, such as maintenance and engineering, quality
assurance (QA), and flight operations.
b. Group Members.
(1) If you use committees or boards as major decision-making groups for CASS issues,
members of these groups should:
• Have an appropriate technical background, and
• Be thoroughly familiar with the role and functioning of CASS, systems analysis,
and how to evaluate the RCA and proposed corrective actions submitted for
their review.
(2) You should consider requiring participants in such committees or boards to receive
training or orientation on these issues to ensure that they can provide critical evaluation. The
membership of such boards and committees as well as the basic operating procedures and
records should be described in your CASS document.
6-2. CASS PERSONNEL TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE.
a. Maintenance. You should determine the precise mix of training and experience your
CASS auditors and analysts need. In general, auditors and analysts should:
(1) Have sufficient maintenance background applicable to your program to ensure that
they are familiar with maintenance procedures, technical documents, and aircraft systems.
Par 6-1 Page 37
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
(2) Be able to understand and interpret the data they see, as well as evaluate facilities,
equipment, and processes they observe. While they are unlikely to have specialized knowledge
in all of the areas over which they conduct surveillance, a foundation of technical expertise is
important.
b. Surveillance and Analysis. Your auditors and analysts should have training and
experience in the functions they are responsible for looking at and analyzing. However, it is also
essential that they have training and experience in the following areas:
• Systems analysis,
• Auditing techniques,
• Risk assessment and risk management (RM),
• RCA, and
• Human factors.
c. Quality Processes and Systems. Additionally, you may seek specialized training in
specific quality processes or systems for your CASS personnel, such as:
(1) The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) developed ISO 9000,
which is a quality system set of standards that seeks to standardize processes into organized and
documented systems.
(2) Six Sigma, which is process-oriented, but from an intensively data-oriented,
statistical approach.
d. Technical. Persons who collect and analyze operational data may require specialized
technical backgrounds. This will depend on the level of complexity of the operational data that
you collect. These personnel may work in the unit conducting an FAA-approved reliability
program or in an independent data collection and analysis system. You may also wish to consider
auditor certification. There are a number of auditor certifications available such as those under
ISO 9001 and the RABQSA International Certification AS9110, Aerospace Auditor.
e. Summary of Experience and Training for Your CASS Personnel. Your CASS
document should reflect that you have considered the type of experience and training, initial and
recurrent, appropriate to your auditors and analysts in your operation. Areas to consider include
those listed in the following table:
Page 38 Par 6-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Table 6-1. Subject Training
Operational Data
Subject Area Auditors Audit Analysts
Analysts
Title 14 of the Code Initial and recurrent. Initial and recurrent. Initial and recurrent.
of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR)
part 121/135
(as applicable);
operations
specifications
(OpSpecs).
Systems analysis General training in General training in General training in
training. quality standards. quality standards, quality standards,
statistics, and/or statistics, and/or
training in widely training in widely
used industry courses used industry courses
such as ISO 9000. such as ISO 9000.
Audit training. Initial and recurrent. Experience or training Statistical
Coordinating in conducting and investigation
Agencies for reporting results of experience or
Supplier’s Evaluation audits. training.
(C.A.S.E.) training if
applicable.
Risk assessment Initial and recurrent. Initial and recurrent. Initial and recurrent.
training.
Root cause analysis Initial and recurrent. Initial and recurrent. Initial and recurrent.
training, including
human factors.
Technical FAA mechanic FAA mechanic FAA mechanic
competence. certificate, certificate, certificate,
engineering, or other engineering, or other engineering, or other
maintenance maintenance maintenance
background. background. background.
Educational Related education or Related education or Related education or
background. training may partially training may partially training may partially
fulfill similar fulfill similar fulfill similar
qualification qualification qualification
requirements set by requirements set by requirements set by
you. you. you.
Par 6-2 Page 39 (and 40)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 7. COMMUNICATIONS BETWEEN YOUR CASS PERSONNEL AND
OTHER DEPARTMENTS
7-1. COMMUNICATING SPECIFIC CASS RESULTS AND ACTIONS. The procedures
that you would use for communicating CASS information and results to interested parties,
internally and, as applicable, externally (for example, vendors, or the FAA) varies depending on
factors such as the size and nature of your operation, the level of automation, and your CASS
procedures themselves. The number and complexity of the standardized communications
processes, such as forms or electronic mail messages with standard distribution, should be
appropriate to the overall size and scope of your operation and CASS.
a. Standard Communication Processes. You should develop appropriate standard
communication processes for all aspects of your CASS to assist in standardizing procedures,
including the following:
(1) Audit checklists and results.
(2) Analysis procedures and results.
(3) Records of audit/analysis findings: internal.
(4) Records of audit/analysis findings: external.
(5) Corrective action forms and corrective action plans. These forms should address
system considerations to ensure that there is a clear understanding of when the person
implementing the corrective action will do so, who is responsible, and what the impact will be on
written procedures.
(6) Information for monitoring and followup of corrective action. The processes should
also assist in tracking the implementation of corrective actions once underway.
(7) Periodic status reports to senior management and to the FAA.
b. CASS Description. Your CASS description should address issues such as:
(1) Who is responsible for keeping these standard communication processes up-to-date
and available.
(2) Who is responsible for completing the standard communication processes.
(3) Where it sends communications, who must respond, and how it tracks responses.
(4) How, where, and for how long it retains completed records.
7-2. EDUCATING PERSONNEL ON CASS. Your CASS should include procedures and
responsibility to create some form of communication between the area responsible for the CASS,
other areas of the company, and the FAA. You may accomplish this through training,
newsletters, bulletins, meetings, or another format that you determine is suitable. One purpose of
Par 7-1 Page 41
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
such communication is to educate your mechanics and other departments that feed information
and data into the CASS about why these data are necessary, what you do with the data, and how
this process benefits the operation.
7-3. COMMUNICATIONS WITH PERSONNEL OUTSIDE THE CASS. The FAA expects
a good communication system to meet the objectives in this section. You must determine which
system is best for your particular operation.
a. Outside Resources. Your CASS should provide for regular, structured communications
within the CASS structure and between your CASS and any other resources involved in
decision-making for you. Examples of these other resources include:
(1) Avionics and other shops,
(2) Cabin safety organization,
(3) Engineering department and FAA-approved reliability program department,
(4) FAA certificate management office (CMO) or PI,
(5) Flight operations,
(6) Ground operations,
(7) Inspection department,
(8) Internal Evaluation Program (IEP),
(9) Maintenance control,
(10) Maintenance operations,
(11) Manufacturers’ technical representatives,
(12) Purchasing,
(13) QA,
(14) Receiving inspection,
(15) Maintenance recordkeeping department,
(16) Safety program,
(17) Senior management,
(18) Stores department, and
(19) Training departments.
Page 42 Par 7-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
b. Feedback Loop. The communications mechanisms should include a feedback loop
designed to ensure that any changes implemented as a result of corrective actions are functioning
as intended and improving the process. You may accomplish this level of communications
through a variety of means, including the following:
(1) Periodic (weekly, monthly, quarterly) statistical and narrative CASS reports on
trends, findings, and the status of corrective actions.
(2) Periodic CASS meetings to discuss trends or specific problem areas. If you are a
smaller certificate holder, where your relevant managers work in close proximity, such meetings
might be informal but frequent, or if you are a larger certificate holder using more formal and
structured meetings, you may designate specific boards or committees.
(3) CASS board or committee meetings, including senior management, possibly on a
monthly or bimonthly basis. Even if meetings are somewhat informal, you should keep minutes.
c. Monthly Report. Typically, if you use a program incorporating statistical performance
standards (alert-type programs), you develop a periodic (monthly) report with appropriate data
displays, summarizing the previous month’s activity. To help evaluate the effectiveness of the
total maintenance program, the report should cover all aircraft systems controlled by the
FAA-approved reliability program. A certificate holder without an FAA-approved reliability
program may find that using a similar report can enhance its CASS.
Par 7-3 Page 43 (and 44)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 8. HOW YOUR CASS DIFFERS FROM AND RELATES TO OTHER
PROGRAMS
8-1. SUMMARY OF OTHER PROGRAMS. Your description of your CASS should identify
other related programs where you participate and explain how your CASS relates to those
programs or differs from them. Experience has shown that certain other programs are potential
sources of information for your CASS. Some programs have been mistakenly assumed to be so
similar to a CASS that you might neglect an important aspect of your CASS. Therefore, your
CASS documentation should describe the relationship between your CASS and programs, such
as the:
• FAA-approved reliability program,
• IEP,
• Safety program,
• Voluntary Disclosure Reporting Program (VDRP),
• Coordinating Agencies for Supplier’s Evaluation (C.A.S.E.),
• Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP), and
• Aviation Safety Reporting Program.
8-2. DISCUSSION OF INDIVIDUAL PROGRAMS.
a. FAA-Approved Reliability Program. According to the current edition of AC 120-17,
Maintenance Control by Reliability Methods, the FAA developed the concept of reliability
control to maintain an acceptable level of reliability. The concept evolved based on FAA and
airline efforts to develop more responsive methods of controlling scheduled maintenance without
sacrificing safety or FAA regulatory responsibility. An FAA-approved reliability program
includes systems for data collection and analysis, corrective action, statistical performance
standards, data display and reporting, scheduled maintenance adjustments, and process changes.
AC 120-17 defines an acceptable level of reliability as maintaining failure rates below a
predetermined value. However, AC 120-17 does not address modern-day, task-based scheduled
maintenance programs.
(1) Typically, if you are a larger certificate holder, you will have an FAA-approved
reliability program, but the operational statistical data collection and analysis requirements of a
program that conforms to AC 120-17 usually exceed the resources or requirements of smaller
and even most medium-sized operators, and generally are greater than what would be necessary
for those operators’ CASS. However, if you do have an approved reliability program, you should
incorporate it into your CASS as the means of performing operational data collection and
analysis to monitor the effectiveness of your maintenance program. Your CASS procedures
should describe how you will integrate the approved reliability program into your CASS. You
should be aware that an FAA-approved reliability program cannot substitute for a CASS because
the reliability program addresses only the scheduled maintenance element and does not include
the broader auditing surveillance and analysis of the full range of all 10 elements of your
maintenance program, nor the complete processes for developing and implementing corrective
actions. An FAA-approved reliability program should be a part of your CASS; however, it
cannot replace or substitute for a CASS.
Par 8-1 Page 45
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
(2) This AC is not intended to describe FAA-approved reliability programs. However,
CASS operational data collection needs are typically similar to, but much more comprehensive
than, those of an approved reliability program. You should, within your CASS, establish a
program similar to an FAA-approved reliability program for the purpose of collecting and
analyzing operational data. However, you must ensure its operational data collection program
meets the needs of your CASS.
(3) Within the aviation community, it is common to refer to “reliability,” in a generic
sense, as meaning dispatch availability of equipment or in relation to equipment failure rates. If
your CASS manual or document uses this terminology, you should distinguish whether the
reference is to an FAA-approved reliability program or generic reliability.
b. IEP.
(1) An IEP is a voluntary program that you can use to provide measurement of your
internal processes and procedures to assess whether they are adequate and functioning properly.
An IEP should be independent of all of your other programs and systems, and could be a useful
tool to evaluate your CASS, as well as other systems or programs, such as your safety program.
An IEP is a very high-level review to provide information to your senior management as to how
well critical programs, such as your CASS, are working. It is not a substitute for a CASS. An IEP
is a broader, system evaluation program and is less “audit-oriented” than your CASS, although
both use a system evaluation approach. An IEP would not focus on evaluating the maintenance
program, because such a focus would duplicate what the CASS is supposed to do. If
management believes they need to have additional evaluation of your maintenance program or
certain elements of your maintenance program, they should direct the CASS to accomplish that
work. An IEP should produce information to determine if the CASS is being performed and is
effective.
(2) The current edition of AC 120-59, Air Carrier Internal Evaluation Programs,
describes the IEP. You should not misunderstand the IEP as a program that replaces existing
regulatory auditing requirements such as a CASS. Audits are a very minor part of an effective
IEP.
c. Safety Program.
(1) According to 14 CFR part 119, § 119.65, if you are conducting operations under
14 CFR part 121, you must have a full-time Director of Safety (DOS) or equivalent position
unless you ask for, and the FAA authorizes, a deviation from the management position
requirements. Consistent with the objectives of part 119, the DOS is responsible for keeping your
highest management officials fully informed about the safety status of your entire operation.
Your DOS should oversee a safety program that addresses the wide range of risks involved in
operations in air transportation, including flight operations, maintenance operations, and ground
operations. The safety program should be a comprehensive program with a variety of elements,
such as investigations of and a reporting system for accidents and incidents, safety audits and
inspections, operational risk assessment, and trend analysis.
Page 46 Par 8-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
(2) If you conduct operations under 14 CFR part 135, the regulations do not require you
to have a DOS position. Nonetheless, the FAA encourages you to designate a company
management official or manager to monitor and evaluate your flight, maintenance, and ground
safety practices, procedures, and programs and to keep your highest management official fully
informed about the safety status of your entire operation.
d. VDRP. The current edition of AC 00-58, Voluntary Disclosure Reporting Program,
provides guidance for you on procedures to use when voluntarily disclosing to the FAA
violations of Federal aviation regulations. Your participation in the program may reveal
important information regarding maintenance issues and lead to the development of
comprehensive fixes relevant to the maintenance program that your CASS oversees.
(1) Under this program, you may voluntarily report violations of regulations that you
discover and avoid certain enforcement consequences.
(2) While the regulations do not require that your CASS addresses disclosures made
under the VDRP, the FAA recommends that you consider whether to include information from
voluntary disclosures in your CASS in any fashion. For example, your CASS personnel may be
the same personnel as those who handle voluntary disclosures. They may therefore be able to use
“de-identified” information from voluntary disclosures to point to areas where additional
auditing may be necessary. Your CASS personnel should be aware of comprehensive fixes
developed in conjunction with the VDRP. These are, after all, precisely the types of systems or
procedural modifications that an effective CASS is seeking to avoid adverse audit findings or
unwanted operational performance.
e. C.A.S.E.
(1) C.A.S.E. is a cooperative effort within the airline industry to audit suppliers and
vendors and to analyze, control, and determine the acceptability of vendors supplying parts and
maintenance services to participating airlines. According to FAA Order 8900.1, Flight Standards
Information Management System (FSIMS), the FAA has determined that the use of C.A.S.E.
audits satisfies some of the requirements of §§ 121.373 and 135.431. Operations specifications
(OpSpecs) must authorize the use of the C.A.S.E. program to satisfy some of these requirements.
(2) If you participate in C.A.S.E., your CASS procedures should address whether or
how the CASS will use C.A.S.E. audits and the basis for that decision. If the functions being
audited depend on the specifics of your program, a C.A.S.E. audit would probably not suffice.
The important point is that you have a written policy and procedures for when and how to use
C.A.S.E. audit results in your CASS.
f. ASAPs. The current edition of AC 120-66, Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP),
describes this program for the voluntary reporting of safety issues and events by employees, such
as crewmembers and mechanics. ASAPs involve the collection, analysis, and retention of safety
data that would otherwise be unobtainable. Such data can be important input to your CASS.
g. Aviation Safety Reporting Program. The current edition of AC 00-46, Aviation
Safety Reporting Program, describes the Aviation Safety Reporting Program, which uses the
National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) as a third party to receive aviation
Par 8-2 Page 47
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
safety reports. The Aviation Safety Reporting Program invites crewmembers, maintenance
personnel, and others to report to NASA actual or potential discrepancies and deficiencies
involving aviation safety. NASA designed and administers the Aviation Safety Reporting System
to facilitate the program. These reports may help your CASS personnel identify areas of potential
concern within their own company based on industry-wide trends or experiences identified by
NASA.
Page 48 Par 8-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 9. HOW TO DETERMINE IF YOUR CASS IS WORKING PROPERLY
9-1. WHY YOU SHOULD EVALUATE YOUR CASS.
a. Accomplishing its Function. As with any system or program, you should evaluate your
CASS (that is, you should accomplish a process measurement) so that any personnel responsible
for overseeing your CASS, such as your top management, may be confident that your CASS is
accomplishing its function. Verifying that your CASS is working as intended is also a primary
oversight task of your FAA PI.
b. Effective by Design. A common misconception is that a certificate holder can evaluate
its CASS solely on the basis of the results of its maintenance program. That is, it is common to
assume that if your aircraft are consistently airworthy, then your CASS must be doing its job.
However, this favorable result may occur for other reasons, such as the extraordinary diligence
or memory of a few individuals. The purpose of your CASS is to ensure, with a system-oriented,
structured approach that your maintenance program is functioning properly and is effective,
consistently and by design rather than good fortune. You should not assume that good
maintenance is synonymous with your CASS working properly.
c. Functioning Properly. Thus, personnel with CASS oversight responsibilities
(including the FAA) require a different approach to determining if your CASS is indeed working
properly. They need to know that you have complete CASS policies and procedures to monitor
and evaluate your maintenance program, that it is carrying out these policies and procedures, and
that they work. For example, to ensure that your CASS is functioning properly, a senior manager
would not analyze component removal rates, but rather verify that your CASS was analyzing
component removal rates, detecting trends as appropriate, and implementing corrective actions
when necessary. You should have procedures—either in your CASS manual, referenced in your
CASS manual, or contained in another document such as its IEP manual—for evaluating your
CASS and informing top management as to the effectiveness of your CASS. The regulations not
only require a maintenance program to meet many specific standards; they also require a system
(CASS) to monitor that program.
9-2. STEPS TO EVALUATE YOUR CASS. The FAA expects you to develop your own
method of evaluating that your CASS is working properly, including how you intend to measure
whether you have allocated sufficient staffing and resources to the CASS.
a. System Safety Attributes. Determine that your CASS addresses applicable system
safety attributes (responsibility, authority, procedures, controls, process measurement, and
interfaces). If you have an IEP that follows this format, it would provide your senior
management with an appropriate means of evaluating your CASS. That would be one way, but
not the only way, to evaluate your CASS.
b. Indicators. The following questions may be useful in indicating whether you properly
designed your CASS or that it is working as intended, although you may identify other
indicators:
(1) Are your CASS personnel sufficiently independent of the areas they audit? Are they
trained specifically in their CASS responsibilities?
Par 9-1 Page 49
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
(2) Have you allocated resources to your CASS sufficient to permit timely analysis of
audits and data, as well as followup to corrective actions? Or are there delays in responding to
findings and implementing corrective actions?
(3) Are your CASS personnel able to perform their duties in accordance with
reasonable schedules?
(4) How many findings does your CASS produce, and what are the trends?
NOTE: CASS is supposed to produce findings, so absolute numbers—even
high numbers of findings—are not necessarily a negative outcome; if
combined with effective corrective actions and followup action, numerous
CASS findings could be a positive indicator that the CASS is doing its job of
detecting deficiencies and yielding appropriate, well-analyzed corrective
actions. Trends are important, however. The same types of findings should
not recur often once the CASS has addressed those findings.
(5) Have an unusually large number of unplanned maintenance events occurred within a
specified time; for example, 21 days after a substantial inspection or other maintenance task? If
so, does an investigation indicate that there are deficiencies in your maintenance program that
your CASS should have identified and averted, or can the investigation attribute the anomaly to
other factors?
(6) Does analysis indicate recurring problems in areas that you previously thought
corrective actions had addressed?
(7) Are new problem areas coming to light? (This would be indicative of your CASS
working to detect new issues.)
(8) Are your CASS corrective actions resulting in new problem areas, reflecting
insufficient root cause, risk, or system analysis before implementing these corrective actions?
(9) How do CASS results compare with outside audit results, such as those conducted
by the DOD or the FAA?
(10) Have regulatory violations occurred that your CASS might have averted?
(11) Does your senior management understand and support the CASS?
(12) Are your CASS auditors and analysts encouraged to consider all possible aspects of
an issue, including the role of your senior management, when developing corrective actions?
(13) Has your CASS evolved into a punitive process (the blame culture) with the effect
of discouraging open participation of company personnel, or do your personnel cooperate
actively and offer input to the CASS?
(14) Are all areas of your maintenance program undergoing CASS audits in accordance
with a schedule based on a process of risk assessment and prioritization?
Page 50 Par 9-2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
(15) Do the depth and quality of the audit reports and analysis reflect that your personnel
have sufficient time and resources?
c. Senior Management Review. Your senior management should review CASS issues on
a monthly or bimonthly basis. You may hold meetings of this sort, possibly of CASS or
maintenance management committees or boards, to discuss findings, analysis, and progress of
corrective actions. These meetings may address statistical data and trends, depending on your
size, type of operation, and capability of producing comprehensive statistical reports.
Par 9-2 Page 51 (and 52)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 10. THE ROLE OF THE FAA IN RELATION TO YOUR CASS
10-1. THE FAA’S ROLE, IN GENERAL. As with any applicable aviation regulation, you
must understand that you hold the primary responsibility for regulatory compliance, not the
FAA. The FAA’s role is not to design the CASS for each certificate holder, but to ensure that
you have satisfactory policies and procedures in place. For example, the FAA will not provide
you with an extensive list of data that you should collect and analyze because of the wide
variation in the nature and scope of airline operations. However, the FAA expects you to
demonstrate that your CASS includes a process for selecting and periodically reevaluating data
sets appropriate for your operation and appropriate for monitoring your own unique maintenance
program. The FAA also expects you to have a logical and current reason for selecting the data set
it collects.
10-2. THE FAA PI’S ROLE. The term FAA PI, as used in this AC, is generally intended to
mean the principal maintenance inspector (PMI). However, the principal avionics inspector
(PAI) also plays an important role in the oversight of the certificate holder’s CASS and shares
many of the same responsibilities as the PMI. The FAA PI:
a. Assists in Developing Your CASS. Works with you in developing your CASS,
providing guidance and ensuring that your CASS meets the requirements of the regulations.
b. Reviews CASS Records. Reviews your CASS records, such as results of audits and
analysis, corrective action, and followup. Therefore, it would be useful for you and your PI to
have a common understanding of how long you will retain these records, not only in terms of
usefulness to your CASS, but also to facilitate review by your PI to help him or her determine
that you are properly executing your CASS.
c. Meets with Maintenance and QA Management. Meets on a regular basis with
managers in your maintenance and QA areas, particularly with the person responsible for your
CASS. Your CASS should provide one of the best barometers of the overall status of your
maintenance program, how you or others are using it, whether it is effective, and whether a
change is being effected as necessary.
d. Meets with Senior Management. Meets with your senior management to determine
how well they understand and support the CASS.
Par 10-1 Page 53 (and 54)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
CHAPTER 11. ADMINISTRATIVE INFORMATION
11-1. HOW TO OBTAIN THIS AND OTHER FAA PUBLICATIONS.
a. AC 00.2 and AC 00-44. The current edition of AC 00.2, Advisory Circular Checklist
and Status of Other FAA Publications, contains a listing of all ACs. The current edition of
AC 00-44, Status of Federal Aviation Regulations, contains a listing of the Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) and current prices.
b. ACs Online. You can get copies of this and other ACs online at
http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars.
c. Regulations Online. You can also obtain a copy of current regulations online at
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/ecfr.
d. CFR and ACs by Mail. You can obtain the CFR and ACs for a fee from the following
address:
Superintendent of Documents
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954
e. Mailing List. For placement on our mailing list of free ACs, contact:
U.S. Department of Transportation
Subsequent Distribution Office
SVC-121.23
Ardmore East Business Center
3341Q 75th Avenue
Landover, MD 20785
f. FAA Web Site. Our Web site is located at http://www.faa.gov. The FSIMS Web site is
located at http://fsims.faa.gov.
Par 11-1 Page 55 (and 56)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 1
APPENDIX 1. SAMPLE CASS FOR A LARGE CERTIFICATE HOLDER
Type of Certificate Holder
Fleet composition 250 turbojet airplanes; B-737, B-757, A-320.
Number of maintenance base Base station and 25 line stations.
and line stations
Proportion of maintenance All letter checks, overhauls, and major maintenance
contracted to third parties performed in-house. Some line maintenance, parts
work, and off-wing engine work is contracted.
Scheduled or on-demand Scheduled (Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(14 CFR) part 121).
Size and structure of the Engineering and maintenance organizations include
maintenance organization extensive engineering capability, quality assurance
(QA) department, full range of shops for support,
components, electronics, engines, etc.
a. Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS) Management and Planning.
b. General Priority. This certificate holder prioritizes in the following general manner:
(1) Safe operations (air and ground).
(2) Detect and prevent noncompliance.
(3) Improve operating efficiency.
c. CASS Written Procedures (A System Safety Attribute: Procedures). A separate
CASS manual contains the CASS written procedures. The CASS appendix is detailed, including
specific procedures for root cause and systems analysis and discussion of how to address human
factors.
d. CASS in the Certificate Holder Organization. The senior vice president of
engineering and maintenance (14 CFR part 119, § 119.65 Director of Maintenance (DOM)) has
overall authority and responsibility for this air carrier’s maintenance program, including the
CASS. The CASS specifically appears on the functional organizational flowchart.
e. Authority for CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Authority). The director of QA
holds the direct authority for the CASS.
f. Responsibility for CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Responsibility). The CASS
board has direct responsibility for the CASS. The manager of the CASS chairs the board and
reports to the director of QA.
Page 1
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 1
g. Policy for CASS Auditor/Analyst Independence from Production (A System Safety
Attribute: Controls). CASS auditors/analysts are in a separate department under QA.
Operational data collection and analysis are assigned to the reliability group (within the
certificate holder’s Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)-approved reliability program) in the
engineering department. The reliability group reports CASS information directly to the CASS
board.
h. Policy Regarding Personnel Actions Resulting from CASS Findings/Results. The
certificate holder’s policy is consistent with its participation in Aviation Safety Action Programs
(ASAP) and the Voluntary Disclosure Reporting Program (VDRP). Inadvertent errors do not
lead to disciplinary action or FAA enforcement action. Full reporting and disclosure are
encouraged to facilitate system corrections.
i. Surveillance and Analysis of Performance of Maintenance Program.
Audits
Responsibility Manager of CASS.
Prioritization CASS board develops a surveillance plan based on risk assessment.
The CASS board assigned each area an onsite audit accomplished
semiannually to every 5 years, depending on the risk assessment. Also
Cycles depending on the risk assessment, some areas never receive an onsite
audit assignment. The CASS board updates the annual audit plan
quarterly.
CASS covers all internal and third-party areas of maintenance.
Coordinating Agencies for Supplier’s Evaluation (C.A.S.E.) audits may
Scope
indicate the need for followup audits or may be integrated into the
CASS.
Full-time CASS auditors use checklists and conduct annual interviews
of personnel at all levels of maintenance to uncover concerns or latent
problems. The CASS department receives reports of all
maintenance-related events, such as rejected takeoffs, for analysis and
Process use in risk assessment for audits. Schedule special audits as needed.
The CASS also reviews self-audits from all departments. Some vendors
conduct their audits by document reviews, written questionnaires,
telephone followup, or combinations of these. Followup is required if
preliminary results raise concerns.
Report the initial results to the manager of CASS. The CASS board
Flow reviews summaries of all findings/initial analyses and details of issues
as deemed necessary by the manager of CASS.
Page 2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 1
Analysis
Auditors conduct preliminary analysis based on specific experience and
Responsibility training and internally developed guidelines that channel analysis to
system root causes.
Perform Auditor/analyst.
preliminary
root cause
analysis
Classify CASS board and analysts.
hazards/
perform risk
assessment
The CASS board transmits results to the affected department, which
Flow assigns personnel to participate on the corrective action team under
direction of the CASS board.
j. Surveillance and Analysis of Effectiveness of Maintenance Program.
Operational Data Collection
Responsibility Manager of CASS.
Prioritization The reliability group determines priority based on risk assessment.
Extensive. Ranges from pilot reports, Engine Condition Monitoring
(ECM), mechanical delays, and teardown reports to data from special
authorizations such as category II/III, extended range operation with
Scope
two-engine airplanes, and operations in Reduced Vertical Separation
Minimum (RVSM) airspace and minimum navigation performance
specifications (MNPS) airspace.
In accordance with the certificate holder’s FAA-approved reliability
program. Data collection is oriented toward detecting trends, positive
or negative, before the occurrence of events. However, data collection
(and analysis) may vary based on maintenance-related events. The
Process CASS board formally reviews the list of operational data sets collected
by the CASS board every 2 years to determine if it needs to be
adjusted. The initial list is based on the current edition of Advisory
Circular (AC) 120-17, Maintenance Control by Reliability Methods,
and CASS board determinations.
The reliability group, although located within the engineering
Flow
department, has a direct reporting relationship to the manager of CASS.
Analysis of Operational Data
Responsibility Reliability group.
Prioritization Reliability board.
Technical experts within the reliability group perform the analysis and
Process
make preliminary determination of possible root causes.
Flow Results are reported to the manager of CASS and the CASS board.
Page 3
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 1
k. Corrective Action.
Final Root Cause Analysis (RCA)
Responsibility Manager(s) of technical area(s) affected.
The director of CASS transmits preliminary analysis results to the
manager of the affected department, who designates technical
Procedures personnel to coordinate final RCA with the auditor/analyst. The CASS
auditor/analyst oversees the process and ensures that the formal RCA
process, including human factors and systems analysis, is followed.
Use of specific Internally developed analytical process and industry tools.
analytical
systems
The auditor/analyst and technical department develop a joint final
Flow
report and submit it to their respective managers.
Determination of Corrective Action Options
The CASS board appoints a corrective action team to include the
Responsibility CASS auditor/analyst, reliability group, technical area(s) affected, and
related areas potentially affected (for example, flight operations).
The team leader is from the technical area affected. Perform risk
assessment of the problem and develop corrective action options. The
Procedures CASS auditor/analyst or reliability group representative does not
propose corrective actions but reviews options for systems
considerations and relevance to RCA.
The manager(s) of the affected area(s), working with the team,
Flow
transmits options to the CASS board.
Selection of Corrective Action and Corrective Action Plan
Responsibility CASS board.
Decision based on a priority for safety and regulatory compliance. Risk
assessment is the basic tool to support the decision. CASS personnel do
Procedures
not participate in the development of the corrective action but review
for systems considerations and relevance to RCA.
Depends on the level of the problem and the corrective action. Routine
issues may be resolved at the team level with direct implementation by
the affected area manager; the CASS board is then advised of this
Flow action. More significant program changes may require prior review and
concurrence from the CASS board. The CASS board may raise highest
level decisions to the director of QA or senior vice president of
engineering and maintenance.
Page 4
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 1
Followup
Responsibility Manager of CASS.
CASS auditor/analyst or reliability group, as applicable, assigned to
develop a followup plan based on the seriousness of the problem.
Procedures Followup may include communications from technical area verifying
effectiveness, followup audits or data collection, and/or a followup
evaluation.
The technical area reports implementation status to the manager of the
CASS, who informs the CASS board. The CASS board may inform the
Flow
director of QA if the problem is sufficiently serious or the
implementation plan is not followed.
NOTE: The above tables provide many examples of the system safety
attributes: controls and procedures.
l. Communications Between CASS and Other Personnel (A System Safety Attribute:
Interfaces).
Communication of Specific CASS Results and Actions
Responsibility CASS board.
Audits based on updated checklists. The CASS collects and stores
operational data in computer systems, and some analysis and alerting
Procedures features are automated. Audit and analysis results communicated
through company electronic mail system, with acknowledgements.
Corrective action tracking through computerized database system.
Electronic mail and standard electronic reports of information flow
Flow among CASS board, corrective action teams, technical areas, and
director of QA, when applicable.
Communications with Maintenance Personnel
Responsibility CASS board.
The CASS initial and recurrent training included for all personnel,
Procedures including lectures from CASS personnel. Monthly newsletter summary
to production areas regarding CASS activities.
The CASS department works with the training and company
Flow communications department, and receives feedback from managers and
supervisors, particularly in the maintenance areas.
Page 5
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 1
Interfaces (A System Safety Attribute: Interfaces)
Responsibility CASS board.
Procedures
To CASS Board Reliability group provides regular reports on analysis results, trends,
and concerns.
Auditors/analysts provide regular reports on findings, analyses, trends,
and concerns.
VDRP manager provides summaries of disclosures and proposed
comprehensive fixes for CASS review and input.
Copies of C.A.S.E. audit results.
CASS auditors review reports from company ASAPs and at least
annually review maintenance-related Aviation Safety Reporting
Program reports for consideration in setting audit and operational data
collection priorities.
From CASS Feedback to technical areas regarding findings, trends, concerns, and
Board followup results.
Feedback to VDRP manager regarding proposed comprehensive fixes;
coordination with manager of CASS.
Monthly reliability analysis summaries and other CASS summaries for
distribution to the vice president of engineering and maintenance,
director of QA and other senior management, department managers in
maintenance, flight and ground operations, Internal Evaluation
Program (IEP), safety office, and FAA principal inspector (PI).
CASS reports reflect VDRP comprehensive fixes without detailing the
initiating circumstances.
Semiannual summary report to chief executive officer (CEO).
Copies of reliability reports and CASS summaries to the FAA PI. The
FAA PI has online access to CASS reports and documents such as
summaries, analysis, trends, and corrective action tracking.
CASS board meeting minutes.
Flow Communications channeled through manager of CASS.
m. Personnel Who Perform CASS Functions.
(1) Full-time auditors and analysts; in some cases, an auditor may also be an analyst.
(2) All members of the CASS board who have not participated in specific CASS
training receive a total of 16 hours initial training covering CASS, root cause and systems
analysis, and human factors.
(3) Company has hired a human factors specialist to address issues across all
departments and to participate on the CASS board.
Page 6
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 1
How the Certificate Holder Evaluates Its CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Process
Measurement)
Responsibility Senior vice president of engineering and maintenance.
Procedures IEP evaluates CASS annually.
The CASS transmits IEP reports directly to the CEO and to the senior
Flow
vice president of engineering and maintenance.
Page 7 (and 8)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 2
APPENDIX 2. SAMPLE CASS FOR A MEDIUM CERTIFICATE HOLDER
Type of Certificate Holder
Fleet composition 75 turboprop and turbojet airplanes; ATR–42, Canadair
Regional Jets.
Number of maintenance base Base station and five line stations.
and line stations
Proportion of maintenance A, B, and C checks and most major maintenance
contracted to third parties in-house. Off-wing engine maintenance, avionics, and
instrument overhauls contracted.
Scheduled or on-demand Scheduled (Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations
(14 CFR) part 121).
Size and structure of the Engineering and maintenance organizations, including
maintenance organization small engineering capability, shops for support,
components, electronics, engines, etc.; and quality
assurance (QA) department.
a. Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS) Management and Planning.
b. General Priority. This certificate holder prioritizes in the following general manner:
(1) Safe operations (air and ground).
(2) Detect and prevent noncompliance.
(3) Improve operating efficiency.
c. CASS Written Procedures (A System Safety Attribute: Procedures). An appendix
to the general maintenance manual describes CASS. The detailed CASS appendix includes
specific procedures for root cause and systems analysis, and discussion of awareness of human
factors.
d. CASS in the Certificate Holder Organization. The chief executive officer (CEO)
supports the CASS. CASS specifically appears on the functional organizational flowchart.
e. Authority for CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Authority). The senior vice
president of engineering and maintenance (14 CFR part 119, § 119.65 Director of Maintenance
(DOM)) has overall authority and responsibility for this air carrier’s maintenance program,
including the CASS. In this case, the senior vice president of engineering and maintenance also
has the direct authority for this air carrier’s CASS.
f. Responsibility for CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Responsibility). The director
of QA heads the CASS board, which includes key department heads in engineering and
maintenance, training, and flight operations.
g. Policy for CASS Auditor/Analyst Independence from Production (A System Safety
Attribute: Controls). CASS auditor/analysts are in a separate department under QA.
Operational data collection and analysis assigned to a “CASS reliability group” that is contained
Page 1
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 2
within the engineering department. The CASS documentation is explicit that this certificate
holder’s reliability program is not Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)-approved. The
reliability group reports CASS information directly to the director of QA.
h. Policy Regarding Personnel Actions Resulting from CASS Findings/Results.
Inadvertent errors will not lead to disciplinary action. Encourage full reporting and disclosure to
facilitate system corrections. Certificate holder participates in the FAA Voluntary Disclosure
Reporting Program (VDRP).
i. Surveillance and Analysis of Performance of Maintenance Program.
Audits
Responsibility Director of QA.
Prioritization CASS board develops audit plan based on risk assessment.
The CASS board reviews its established audit plan annually. The CASS
board completes onsite audits on a semiannual or biannual basis,
Cycles
depending on the risk assessment. Also depending on the risk
assessment, some areas never receive an onsite audit assignment.
Scope All internal and third-party areas of maintenance.
CASS board developed audit checklists for use by auditors. Auditors
conduct their audits in accordance with the annual plan. The CASS
department receives reports of all maintenance-related events such as
rejected takeoffs for analysis and use in risk assessment for audits. The
Process
CASS may schedule special audits as needed. Some vendors conduct
their audits by document reviews, written questionnaires, and telephone
followup, or combinations of these. If preliminary results raise
concerns, you must followup.
Flow Initial reports and summaries to director of QA.
Analysis
Responsibility Director of QA.
Perform Auditor/analyst.
preliminary
root cause
analysis
Classify CASS board and analysts classify hazards and perform risk assessment.
hazards/
perform risk
assessment
Director of QA reports summaries of all findings/initial analysis and
details of issues to the CASS board for review and concurrence. CASS
Flow
board transmits results to affected department, which forms corrective
action team.
j. Surveillance and Analysis of Effectiveness of Maintenance Program.
Page 2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 2
Operational Data Collection
Responsibility Director of QA.
Prioritization Reliability group.
Includes pilot reports, Engine Condition Monitoring (ECM), mechanical
Scope
delays, teardown reports, and other data.
Modeled after FAA-approved reliability programs. Data collection
oriented toward detecting trends, positive or negative, before occurrence
of events. However, data collection (and analysis) may vary based on
Process maintenance-related events. The CASS board formally reviews
collected operational data sets every 2 years; initial list based on
Advisory Circular (AC) 120–17, Maintenance Control by Reliability
Methods; and CASS board determinations.
Reliability group, although located within the engineering department,
Flow
has a direct reporting relationship to the director of QA.
Analysis of Operational Data
Responsibility Director of QA.
Prioritization Reliability group.
Analysis performed by technical experts within the reliability group;
Process includes preliminary determination of possible root causes or possible
procedural changes.
Flow Results are reported to CASS board.
k. Corrective Action.
Final Root Cause Analysis
Responsibility Director of QA.
CASS board transmits preliminary analysis results to the manager(s) of
the affected department(s), who designates technical personnel to
Procedures conduct final RCA with CASS auditor/analyst. CASS analyst oversees
the process and ensures the RCA process, including human factors and
systems analysis, is followed.
Use of specific Internally developed formal analysis process or common industry tools.
analytical
systems
Technical department develops final report and submits it to the director
Flow
of QA.
Page 3
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 2
Determination of Corrective Action Options
Director of QA designates corrective action team, led by primary
Responsibility affected technical department(s), whose manager(s) designates a team
leader.
Risk assessment of the problem and the options. The CASS
auditor/analyst or reliability group representative does not propose
Procedures
corrective actions but reviews possibilities for systems considerations
and relevance to RCA.
Flow Team presents recommendation to CASS board.
Selection of Corrective Action and Corrective Action Plan
Responsibility Director of QA.
Decision based on a priority for safety and regulatory compliance. Risk
Procedures assessment is the basic tool to support the decision. CASS board verifies
systems considerations and relevance to RCA.
Depends on the level of the problem and the corrective action. Routine
issues may be resolved at the team level with direct implementation by
the affected area manager; advise the CASS board of this action. More
Flow
significant program changes may require prior review and concurrence
from CASS board or elevation to vice president of engineering and
maintenance.
Followup
Responsibility CASS board.
CASS auditor/analyst or reliability group, as applicable, assigned to
develop a followup plan based on the seriousness of the problem.
Procedures Followup may include communications from a technical area verifying
implementation, followup audits or data collection, and/or followup
evaluation.
Technical area manager reports to director of QA, who reports to CASS
Flow
board.
NOTE: The above tables provide many examples of the system safety
attributes: controls and procedures.
l. Communications Between CASS and Other Personnel (A System Safety Attribute:
Interfaces).
Page 4
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 2
Communication of Specific CASS Results and Actions
Responsibility CASS board.
Audits based on updated checklists. Operational data are collected and
stored in computerized database systems; some analysis and alerting
Procedures features are automated. Audit and analysis results communicated
through paper forms. Corrective action tracking through computerized
database system.
Through electronic mail communications and standard paper reports,
Flow information flows among CASS board, corrective action teams,
technical areas, and the director of QA.
Communications with Maintenance Personnel
Responsibility CASS board.
CASS training included for all personnel. Initial and recurrent training.
Procedures The certificate holder’s employee newsletter includes a brief monthly
report on CASS results.
CASS board works with training and company communications
Flow department, and receives feedback from managers and supervisors,
particularly in maintenance areas.
Page 5
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 2
Interfaces (A System Safety Attribute: Interfaces)
Responsibility CASS board.
Procedures
To CASS Board Reliability group provides regular reports on analysis results, trends, and
concerns regarding operational data.
Auditors/analysts provide regular reports on findings, analyses, trends, and
concerns.
VDRP manager provides summaries of disclosures and proposed
comprehensive fixes for CASS review and input.
Designated CASS auditor/analyst reviews reports and at least annually reviews
maintenance-related Aviation Safety Reporting Program reports for
consideration in setting audit and operational data collection priorities.
From CASS Feedback to technical areas regarding findings, trends, concerns and followup
Board results.
Feedback to VDRP manager regarding proposed comprehensive fixes;
coordination with director of QA.
Monthly reliability analysis summaries and CASS summaries for distribution
to vice president of engineering and maintenance; director of QA and other
senior management; department managers in maintenance, flight and ground
operations, IEP, and safety office; and FAA principal inspector (PI).
CASS reports reflect VDRP comprehensive fixes without detailing the
initiating circumstances.
Copies of reliability reports and CASS summaries to FAA PI.
CASS board meeting minutes.
Semiannual summary report to CEO; copy to FAA PI.
Flow Communications channeled through director of QA.
m. Personnel Who Perform CASS Functions.
(1) Full-time auditors and analysts; in some cases, an auditor may also be an analyst.
(2) All members of the CASS board who have not participated in specific CASS
training receive a total of 12 hours initial training covering CASS, root cause and systems
analysis, and human factors.
How the Certificate Holder Evaluates Its CASS (A System Safety Attribute — Process
Measurement)
Responsibility Vice president of engineering and maintenance.
Procedures IEP evaluates CASS annually.
The CASS transmits IEP reports on CASS directly to the CEO and to
Flow
the vice president of engineering and maintenance.
Page 6
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 3
APPENDIX 3. SAMPLE CASS FOR A SMALL CERTIFICATE HOLDER
Type of Certificate Holder
Fleet composition Two turbojet airplanes; Gulfstream G-III (12 seats).
Number of maintenance base Base station only.
and line stations
Proportion of maintenance A checks in-house; B, C, and D checks, all off-wing
contracted to third parties engine maintenance and all overhauls of engines,
instruments, and avionics contracted out.
Scheduled or on-demand On-demand (Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 135).
Size and structure of the Maintenance organizational structure comprises of the
maintenance organizations Director of Maintenance (DOM) with chief inspector.
a. Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS) Management and Planning.
b. General Priority. This certificate holder prioritizes in the following general manner:
(1) Safe operations (air and ground).
(2) Detect and prevent noncompliance.
(3) Improve operating efficiency.
c. CASS Written Procedures (A System Safety Attribute: Procedures). CASS chapter
in general maintenance manual. The CASS chapter includes specific procedures for root cause
and systems analysis, and discussion of awareness of human factors.
d. CASS in the Certificate Holder Organization. Chief executive officer (CEO) actively
participates in the CASS. CASS specifically appears on functional organizational flowchart.
e. Authority for CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Authority). The DOM (14 CFR
part 119, § 119.65 DOM) has overall authority and responsibility for this air carrier’s
maintenance program, including the CASS.
f. Responsibility for CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Responsibility). DOM heads
CASS committee, which includes the CEO, chief inspector, and director of flight operations.
g. Policy for CASS Auditor/Analyst Independence from Production (A System Safety
Attribute: Controls). DOM “borrows” auditors from within or outside the company based on
auditor qualifications. Priorities are (1) independence from audited department and (2)
experience or familiarity with the area to be audited. Every 5 years the company contracts an
independent firm to conduct an outside evaluation of CASS and other certificate holder systems
and programs to verify sufficient objectivity in the audits.
h. Policy Regarding Personnel Actions Resulting from CASS Findings/Results.
Inadvertent errors will not lead to disciplinary action. Full reporting and disclosure encouraged to
facilitate system corrections.
Page 1
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 3
i. Surveillance and Analysis of Performance of Maintenance Program.
Audits
Responsibility DOM.
Prioritization CASS committee assigns priorities based on risk assessment.
The CASS committee establishes an audit plan and accomplishes onsite
audits annually, depending on the risk assessment. Also depending on
Cycles
the risk assessment, some areas never receive an onsite audit
assignment.
Scope All internal and third-party areas of maintenance.
CASS committee developed audit checklists for use by auditors, who
may be committee members or personnel drawn from throughout the
company. DOM receives reports of all maintenance-related events such
as rejected takeoffs for analysis and use in risk assessment for audits.
Process
Schedule special audits as needed. Vendors conduct their audits by
document reviews, written questionnaires, and telephone followup, or
combinations of these. Regulations require followup if preliminary
results raise concerns.
Flow Initial results are reported to the DOM.
Analysis
Responsibility DOM (conducts preliminary analysis with the auditor).
Perform Auditor/analyst.
preliminary
root cause
analysis
Classify CASS committee.
hazards/
perform risk
assessment
CASS committee reviews all findings/initial analysis and details of
issues as deemed necessary by the DOM. The CASS committee acts as
Flow
the core corrective action team (as required, other personnel may
supplement this).
j. Surveillance and Analysis of Effectiveness of Maintenance Program.
Page 2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 3
Operational Data Collection
Responsibility DOM.
Prioritization DOM.
Basic. Includes pilot reports, Engine Condition Monitoring (ECM),
Scope
mechanical delays, cancellations, teardown reports, and other data.
Data collection oriented toward detecting trends, positive or negative,
before occurrence of events. The CASS committee formally reviews the
Process list of operational data sets collected every 2 years to determine if it
needs to be adjusted. The initial list is based on CASS committee
experience at other operations and with this fleet.
Flow Flight operations and DOM transmit reports to CASS committee.
Analysis of Operational Data
Responsibility DOM.
Prioritization CASS committee.
Analysis performed by DOM or chief inspector. Preliminary
Process
determination of possible root causes or possible procedural changes.
Flow Report results to the CASS committee.
Corrective Action
Responsibility DOM.
Designates technical personnel to perform final Root Cause Analysis
(RCA) and identify corrective action options. DOM oversees the
Procedures
process and ensures the RCA process, including human factors and
systems analysis, is followed.
Use of specific Based on DOM’s training and internally developed procedures.
analytical
systems
Flow DOM presents corrective action options to CASS committee.
Selection of Corrective Action and Corrective Action Plan
Responsibility CASS committee.
Decision based on a priority for safety and regulatory compliance. Risk
Procedures assessment is the basic tool to support the decision. CASS committee
verifies systems considerations and relevance to RCA.
Flow CASS committee makes selection.
Page 3
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 3
Followup
Responsibility CASS committee.
Affected technical personnel report to CASS committee on
Procedures implementation of corrective action. DOM may independently verify.
Followup audit planned for following year cycle of audits.
Flow Technical area reports to DOM, who informs CASS committee.
NOTE: The above tables provide many examples of the system safety
attributes: controls and procedures.
k. Communications Between CASS and Other Personnel (A System Safety Attribute:
Interfaces).
Communication Specific CASS Results and Actions
Responsibility CASS committee.
Audits based on updated checklists. The CASS committee collects
Procedures operational data and stores it in files. Audit and analysis results
communicated through electronic mail.
Flow Electronic mail communications to all company management.
Communications with Maintenance Personnel
Responsibility CASS committee.
Procedures DOM conducts initial briefing for all personnel to orient them on CASS.
Flow DOM to all affected personnel.
Interfaces (A System Safety Attribute — Interfaces)
Responsibility CASS committee.
Procedures
To CASS DOM provides regular reports on analysis results, trends, and concerns
Committee regarding operational data.
Chief inspector reviews reports at least annually and reviews
maintenance-related Aviation Safety Reporting Program reports for
consideration in setting audit and operational data collection priorities.
From CASS Feedback to technical areas regarding findings, trends, concerns, and followup
Committee results.
CASS committee meeting minutes.
Flow Communications channeled through DOM.
l. Personnel Who Perform CASS Functions. Auditors and analysts are only part-time in
these functions. They receive some specific CASS training, including on-the-job and formal
training.
Page 4
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 3
How the Certificate Holder Evaluates its CASS (A System Safety Attribute: Process
Measurement)
Responsibility CEO.
CEO reviews indicators of a properly designed and functioning CASS,
Procedures including quality of analysis, independence of the audits, and
sufficiency of third-party audit procedures.
The CEO documents his or her review and shares it with CASS
Flow
committee members and the FAA principal inspector (PI).
Page 5 (and 6)
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 4
APPENDIX 4. CASS MANUAL/DOCUMENT SAMPLE CONTENTS
a. General Information.
(1) Definition of terms.
(2) Purpose of the Continuing Analysis and Surveillance System (CASS).
b. System Organization and Personnel.
(1) CASS organizational chart.
(2) Person/position with authority, including how to determine whether a CASS is
functioning properly and policies/procedures for modifying the CASS.
(3) Person/position with responsibility.
(4) Duties and responsibilities of CASS personnel (supervisors, auditors, analysts).
c. Elements Basic to a CASS.
(1) Policies/procedures for scheduling and conducting internal/external audits.
(2) Policies/procedures for identifying and updating the list of operational data sets to
be collected, and for collecting data.
(3) Policies/procedures for analyzing audit results.
(4) Policies/procedures for analyzing operational data.
(5) Policies/procedures for developing proposed corrective actions, and analyzing them.
(6) Policies/procedures for approving and implementing corrective actions, including
changes to the maintenance program.
(7) Policies/procedures for monitoring and followup of corrective actions.
d. Critical CASS Interfaces.
(1) Policies/procedures for communications within the CASS and between the CASS
and other areas of the operation.
(2) Interface documents (audit forms and checklists, corrective action notices, statistical
and periodic reports, etc.; including, as applicable, control, storage, retrieval of CASS records
and communications).
e. Relationship of the CASS to Other Programs. Policies/procedures to integrate or
relate other certificate holder programs to the CASS.
Page 1
AC 120-79A 9/7/10
Appendix 4
f. Personnel Qualifications.
(1) Policies/procedures regarding qualifications and training of CASS personnel.
(2) Training records.
Page 2
9/7/10 AC 120-79A
Appendix 5
APPENDIX 5. PUBLICATIONS USED TO DEVELOP THIS AC
a. Related Documents (current editions). See http://www.airweb.faa.gov.
• Advisory Circular (AC) 00–46, Aviation Safety Reporting Program.
• AC 00–58, Voluntary Disclosure Reporting Program.
• AC 120–16, Air Carrier Maintenance Programs.
• AC 120–59, Air Carrier Internal Evaluation Programs.
• AC 120–66, Aviation Safety Action Programs (ASAP).
• AC 120–72, Maintenance Resource Management Training.
• AC 120–92, Introduction to Safety Management Systems for Air Operators.
• AC 129–4, Maintenance Programs for U.S.-Registered Aircraft Under 14 CFR
Part 129.
• Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Order 8040.4, Safety Risk Management.
• FAA Order 8900.1, Flight Standards Information System (FSIMS).
b. Other Documents and Information Used to Prepare This AC. In addition to the
references cited above, this AC was prepared using the following documents and information:
• Beyond Aviation Human Factors (1995). Daniel E. Maurino, James Reason, Neil
Johnson, and Rob B. Lee. Hants, England: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
• Handbook of Airline Operations (2000). Gail F. Butler and Martin R. Keller,
editors. New York: The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc.
• Handbook of Aviation Human Factors (1999). Daniel J. Garland, John A. Wise, and
V. David Hopkin, editors. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
• Human Factors and Maintenance Resource Management (March 7, 2002).
Presented by Yosef Morgan, Applications Manager, Maricopa County Community
College. Phoenix, Arizona.
• Human Factors in Aviation (1998). Edited by Earl L. Wiener and David C. Nagel.
San Diego: Academic Press.
• Managing the Risks of Organizational Accidents (1997). James T. Reason. Hants,
England: Ashgate Publishing Limited.
• Risk Management in Aviation (March 7, 2002). Presented by Jim Hein, Federal
Aviation Administration Safety Inspector, Honolulu Flight Standards District
Office. Phoenix, Arizona.
• The Limits of Safety: Organizations, Accidents, and Nuclear Weapons (1993). Scott
Douglas Sagan. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Page 1
