Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Circular
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: Upset Prevention and Recovery Date: 1/4/17 AC No: 120-111
Training
Initiated by: AFS-200 Change: 1
1. PURPOSE OF THIS ADVISORY CIRCULAR (AC). This advisory circular (AC)
describes the recommended training for airplane Upset Prevention and Recovery Training
(UPRT). The goal of this AC is to provide recommended practices and guidance for academic
and flight simulation training device (FSTD) training for pilots to prevent developing upset
conditions and ensure correct recovery responses to upsets.
2. PRINCIPAL CHANGES. This change updates FSTD qualification information for UPRT
tasks in Appendix 3 consistent with the amendments to Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 60 in the Flight Simulation Training Device Qualification Standards
for Extended Envelope and Adverse Weather Event Training Tasks final rule and updates
references in Chapters 1 through 3. This change is also responsive to the FAA Extension, Safety,
and Security Act of 2016, section 2102, item 4, which requires the FAA to issue guidance to air
carriers by January 11, 2017, regarding standards for compliance with the requirements for
enhanced pilot training contained in the Qualification, Service, and Use of Crewmembers and
Aircraft Dispatchers final rule published on November 12, 2013.
PAGE CONTROL CHART
Remove Pages Dated Insert Pages Dated
Pages i thru iii (and iv) 4/14/15 Pages i thru iii (and iv) 1/4/17
Pages 4, 7, and 11 4/14/15 Pages 4, 7, and 11 1/4/17
Appendix 3, Pages 1 and 2 4/14/15 Appendix 3, Pages 1 and 2 1/4/17
John S. Duncan
Director, Flight Standards Service
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Circular
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: Upset Prevention and Recovery Date: 4/14/15 AC No: 120-111
Training
Initiated by: AFS-200 Change: 1
This advisory circular (AC) describes the recommended training for airplane Upset Prevention
and Recovery Training (UPRT). The goal of this AC is to provide recommended practices and
guidance for academic and flight simulation training device (FSTD) training for pilots to prevent
developing upset conditions and ensure correct recovery responses to upsets. The AC was
created from recommended practices developed by major airplane manufacturers, labor
organizations, air carriers, training organizations, simulator manufacturers, and industry
representative organizations. This AC provides guidance to Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) part 121 air carriers implementing the regulatory requirements of part 121,
§§ 121.419, 121.420, 121.423, 121.424, 121.426, and 121.427. Although this AC is directed to
air carriers to implement part 121 regulations, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
encourages all airplane operators, pilot schools, and training centers to implement UPRT and to
use this guidance, as applicable to the type of airplane in which training is conducted. The
contents of this document do not have the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the
public in any way, and the document is intended only to provide information to the public
regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
Although a stall is by definition an upset, stall prevention and recovery training is contained in
the current edition of AC 120-109, Stall Prevention and Recovery Training.
Core principles of this AC include:
• Enhanced instructor training on the limitations of simulation.
• Comprehensive pilot academic training on aerodynamics.
• Early recognition of divergence from intended flightpath.
• Upset prevention through improvements in manual handling skills.
• Training that integrates Crew Resource Management (CRM) including progressive
intervention strategies for the pilot monitoring.
CAUTION: Prior to commencing UPRT, air carriers should review 14 CFR
part 60; FSTD Directive 2; and FAA National Simulator Program (NSP)
FSTD Qualification Guidance Bulletin 11-05, FSTD Evaluation and
Qualification for Upset Prevention and Recovery Training (UPRT) Tasks, to
ensure FSTDs are specifically evaluated for UPRT maneuvers. Otherwise,
negative transfer of training could occur.
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
CONTENTS
Paragraph Page
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................1
1-1. General ..............................................................................................................................1
1-2. Background .......................................................................................................................1
1-3. Part 121 Requirements ......................................................................................................1
1-4. AQPs .................................................................................................................................1
1-5. Air Carriers Conducting Training in Airplanes ................................................................1
1-6. Definitions/Terms .............................................................................................................2
1-7. Related Regulations ..........................................................................................................3
1-8. Related FAA Guidance (Current Editions) .......................................................................4
1-9. Related References ............................................................................................................4
1-10. AC Feedback Form ...........................................................................................................4
CHAPTER 2. UPSET PREVENTION AND RECOVERY TRAINING (UPRT) PRINCIPLES ..5
2-1. General ..............................................................................................................................5
2-2. Training Philosophy ..........................................................................................................5
2-3. Importance of the UPRT Instructor ..................................................................................6
2-4. Instructor Requirements (§§ 121.412 and 121.414) .........................................................6
2-5. Instructor Training ............................................................................................................6
2-6. Instructor Standardization. ................................................................................................9
CHAPTER 3. TRAINING METHODOLOGY .............................................................................11
3-1. General ............................................................................................................................11
3-2. Comprehensive Air Carrier UPRT Program ...................................................................11
3-3. Key UPRT Considerations ..............................................................................................12
CHAPTER 4. UPSET RECOVERY TEMPLATE ........................................................................15
4-1. Methodology ...................................................................................................................15
4-2. Upset Recovery Templates .............................................................................................15
Table 1. Nose High Recovery Template .........................................................................16
Table 2. Nose Low Recovery Template .........................................................................17
Table 3. Nose High Recovery Template With Explanation ...........................................18
Table 4. Nose Low Recovery Template With Explanation ............................................20
APPENDIX 1. TRAINING ELEMENTS AND EVENTS (10 pages) ........................................1
APPENDIX 2. SAMPLE TRAINING SCENARIOS AND MANEUVERS (8 pages) .............1
APPENDIX 3. FLIGHT SIMULATION TRAINING DEVICE (FSTD)
CONSIDERATIONS (4 pages) ..........................................................................1
Page iii (and iv)
4/14/15 AC 120-111
CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
1-1. GENERAL. Operational data indicates that some pilots have failed to prevent airplanes
from entering a fully developed upset and have not been able to properly recover from such
events. In addition to stall training, Upset Prevention and Recovery Training (UPRT) is an
essential training element to reduce loss of control events or, if they occur, enable recovery to
normal flight.
1-2. BACKGROUND. Based on accident reviews, a concern exists within the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) and industry regarding loss of control in-flight (LOC-I) accidents. As
LOC-I is generally a consequence of an airplane upset, the FAA reconvened the Section 208
Aviation Rulemaking Committee (ARC) in 2011 to provide recommendations for UPRT. The
FAA, International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), and the European Union Aviation
Safety Agency (EASA) then decided to combine efforts to identify and establish an acceptable
approach to reducing upsets. ICAO sponsored meetings in 2012 during which the 208 ARC,
Civil Aviation Authorities, and subject matter experts participated in focused discussions on
LOC-I accidents and upset recovery training. This combined effort was called the loss of control
avoidance and recovery training (LOCART) initiative. Additionally, the Commercial Aviation
Safety Team (CAST) studied 18 accidents and incidents resulting from a lack of awareness of
either the airplane’s energy or attitude. One recommendation of the team was for air carriers to
conduct upset training using realistic scenarios. This advisory circular (AC) is based upon the
recommendations of both LOCART and CAST.
1-3. PART 121 REQUIREMENTS. All part 121 air carriers, including those who train under
an Advanced Qualification Program (AQP), are required to conduct UPRT beginning
March 12, 2019. The requirement for part 121 pilots to receive upset training is statutorily
mandated in Public Law 111-216, Section 208, and the FAA does not have the authority to
exempt any part 121 air carrier from this requirement. Air carriers must include UPRT for pilots
during:
• Initial training,
• Transition training,
• Differences and related aircraft differences training (if differences exist),
• Conversion training,
• Upgrade training,
• Requalification training (if applicable), and
• Recurrent training.
1-4. AQPs. For simplicity, because the requirements for UPRT are contained in part 121
subpart N and appendix E, the terminology used in this AC is consistent with those regulations.
Air carriers with an AQP should use the content of this AC in conjunction with the current
edition of AC 120-54, Advanced Qualification Program.
1-5. AIR CARRIERS CONDUCTING TRAINING IN AIRPLANES.
a. For part 121 air carriers, § 121.423 requires the following extended envelope training
maneuvers discussed in this AC to be conducted in a Level C or higher full flight simulator
Par 1-1 Page 1
4/14/15 AC 120-111
(FFS): manually controlled slow flight, manually controlled loss of reliable airspeed, manually
controlled instrument departure and arrival, and upset recovery maneuvers. Air carriers are
encouraged to use the highest fidelity level FFS available.
b. In accordance with § 121.423, part 121 air carriers may submit a request to the
Administrator for approval of a deviation from the FFS requirements to conduct the extended
envelope training using an alternative method to meet the learning objectives of § 121.423.
c. Although the training in this AC is designed to be conducted in an FSTD, those
operators using airplanes for training can incorporate into their training programs all of the
academic elements and some of the flight training elements. Operators should carefully select
flight training maneuvers and employ risk mitigation strategies. Airplanes used for flight training
elements should be those designed for the specific maneuvers being conducted, and training
programs should use instructors specifically qualified to conduct UPRT in airplanes. The FAA
recommends that any operator conducting UPRT in airplanes follow the guidance and associated
risk mitigation strategies contained in ICAO Doc 10011, Manual on Aeroplane Upset Prevention
and Recovery Training.
1-6. DEFINITIONS/TERMS. For the purpose of this AC, the following definitions and terms
are provided:
a. Airplane Upset. An airplane in flight unintentionally exceeding the parameters
normally experienced in line operations or training:
• Pitch attitude greater than 25 degrees nose up;
• Pitch attitude greater than 10 degrees nose down;
• Bank angle greater than 45 degrees; or
• Within the above parameters, but flying at airspeeds inappropriate for the
conditions.
b. Angle of Attack (AOA). The angle between the oncoming air, or relative wind, and
some reference line on the airplane or wing.
c. Awareness. Knowledge or perception of the situation.
d. Crew Resource Management (CRM). Effective use of all available resources: human
resources, hardware, and information.
e. Developing Upset Condition. Any time the airplane is diverging from the intended
flightpath and has not yet exceeded the parameters defining airplane upset.
f. Distraction. The diversion of attention away from the primary task of flying.
g. Extended Envelope Training. The flight training contained in § 121.423 consisting of:
• Manually controlled slow flight;
• Manually controlled loss of reliable airspeed;
• Manually controlled instrument departure and arrival;
Par 1-5 Page 2
4/14/15 AC 120-111
• Upset recovery maneuvers;
• Recovery from bounced landing; and
• Instructor-guided hands-on experience of recovery from full stall and stick pusher
activation.
h. Flight Simulation Training Device (FSTD). A full flight simulator (FFS) or a flight
training device (FTD).
i. Flightpath Management. Active manipulation, using either onboard avionics systems
or manual handling, to command the aircraft flight controls to direct the aircraft along a desired
trajectory in the lateral and vertical planes.
j. Instructor Operating Station (IOS). The interface panel between the FSTD instructor
and the FSTD.
k. Landing Configuration. Starts when the landing gear is down and a landing flap
setting has been selected during an approach until executing a landing, go-around, or missed
approach.
l. Loss of Control in Flight (LOC-I). A categorization of an accident or incident
resulting from a deviation from the intended flightpath.
m. Maneuver-Based Training. Training that focuses on a single event or maneuver in
isolation.
n. Prevention. Actions to avoid any divergence from a desired airplane state.
o. Scenario-Based Training (SBT). Training that incorporates maneuvers into real-world
experiences to cultivate practical flying skills in an operational environment.
p. Startle. An uncontrollable, automatic muscle reflex, raised heart rate, blood pressure,
etc., elicited by exposure to a sudden, intense event that violates a pilot’s expectations.
q. Surprise. An unexpected event that violates a pilot’s expectations and can affect the
mental processes used to respond to the event.
r. Transfer of Training. The ability of a trainee to apply knowledge, skills, and behavior
acquired in one learning environment (e.g., a classroom, an FSTD) to another environment
(e.g., flight). In this context, “negative transfer of training” refers to the inappropriate
generalization of knowledge or skills learned in training to line operations.
s. Undesired Aircraft State. A position, velocity, or attitude of an aircraft that reduces or
eliminates safety margins.
1-7. RELATED REGULATIONS. Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR)
parts 61, 91 subpart K (part 91K), 121, 125, 135, and 142.
Par 1-6 Page 3
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
1-8. RELATED FAA GUIDANCE (current editions):
• Safety Alert for Operators (SAFO) 13002, Manual Flight Operations.
• Information for Operators (InFO) 10010, Enhanced Upset Recovery Training.
• Airline Transport Pilot and Type Rating for Airplane Airman Certification
Standards (ACS).
• Commercial Pilot – Airplane ACS.
• FAA Order 8900.1, Volume 2, Air Operator and Air Agency Certification and
Application Process.
• Order 8900.1, Volume 3, General Technical Administration.
• Order 8900.1, Volume 5, Airman Certification.
• AC 120-51, Crew Resource Management Training.
• AC 120-90, Line Operations Safety Audits.
• AC 120-109, Stall Prevention and Recovery Training.
• AC 120-114, Pilot Training and Checking (14 CFR Part 121 Subparts N and O,
Including Appendices E and F).
• FAA Safety Brochure, Spatial Disorientation: Why You Shouldn’t Fly by the Seat of
Your Pants.
1-9. RELATED REFERENCES:
• Airplane Upset Recovery Training Aid (AURTA) Revision 2:
https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/pilots/training/AP_UpsetRecovery_Book.pdf.
• Defensive Flying for Pilots: An Introduction to Threat and Error Management,
Ashleigh Merritt, Ph.D. and James Klinect, Ph.D. (The University of Texas Human
Factors Research Project – The LOSA Collaborative):
https://skybrary.aero/articles/threat-and-error-management-tem.
• Culture, Threat, and Error: Assessing System Safety, Robert L. Helmreich, University
of Texas Human Factors Research Project, The University of Texas at Austin:
https://webhome.auburn.edu/~johnsrd/4050/Slides/latent.pdf.
• The Effectiveness of Airline Pilot Training for Abnormal Events, Stephen M. Casner, et
al., Human Factors, Vol. 55, No. 3, June 2013, pp. 477-485.
• CAST Safety Enhancement 196, Airplane State Awareness – Effective Upset
Prevention and Recovery Training: https://skybrary.aero/articles/se196-airplane-state-
awareness-effective-upset-prevention-and-recovery-training.
• Operational Use of Flight Path Management Systems. Final Report of the
Performance-Based Operations Aviation Rulemaking Committee/Commercial Aviation
Safety Team Flight Deck Automation Working Group, September 5, 2013.
• ICAO Doc 10011, Manual on Aeroplane Upset Prevention and Recovery
Training, 2014.
1-10. AC FEEDBACK FORM. For your convenience, the AC Feedback Form is the last page
of this AC. Note any deficiencies found, clarifications needed, or suggested improvements
regarding the contents of this AC on the Feedback Form.
Par 1-8 Page 4
4/14/15 AC 120-111
CHAPTER 2. UPSET PREVENTION AND RECOVERY TRAINING (UPRT)
PRINCIPLES
2-1. GENERAL. An effective UPRT curriculum provides pilots with the knowledge and skills
to prevent an upset, or if not prevented, to recover from an upset. Training should focus on
preventing upsets rather than waiting to recover from one. The focus on prevention is a
significant shift from previous upset or unusual attitude training, which primarily focused on
recovering from a fully developed upset. Prevention training prepares pilots to avoid incidents,
while recovery training intends to avoid an accident if an upset occurs.
2-2. TRAINING PHILOSOPHY. While basic aerodynamics and unusual attitude1 training are
required elements for a pilot’s private, commercial, and airline transport pilot (ATP)
certifications, it is important to reinforce and expand upon this certification training throughout a
pilot’s career. This advisory circular (AC) describes the academic and flight training components
of a comprehensive UPRT curriculum, requirements for UPRT instructors, flight simulation
training device (FSTD) requirements, upset recovery procedures, and sample UPRT scenarios.
a. Training Goal. A pilot who has successfully completed UPRT will demonstrate
knowledge and skill in preventing, recognizing, and, if necessary, recovering from an upset.
b. Training Methodology. UPRT is to be conducted as train-to-proficiency (i.e., training
will continue until completion criteria are met).
NOTE: UPRT is not to be evaluated in proficiency checks, line-oriented
evaluation (LOE), or by other jeopardy events.
c. Completion Criteria for Prevention. Prevention is the primary goal of UPRT,
including timely action to avoid progression toward a potential upset.
• When acting as either pilot flying (PF) or pilot monitoring (PM), actively scans the
internal and external environment and identifies and alerts the crew to factors that
may lead to divergence from the desired flightpath.
• When acting as PM, creates, communicates, and manages alternative courses of
action that reduce the likelihood of an upset.
d. Completion Criteria for Recognition. Timely action to recognize divergence from the
intended flightpath and interrupt progression toward a potential upset.
• When acting as PF, prompt recognition of divergence from intended flightpath or
uncommanded changes to the aircraft flightpath.
• When acting as PM, active monitoring of aircraft state and flight parameters and
prompt callout of divergence from planned or briefed flightpath.
• Take prompt action (if PF or through callouts if PM) to correct a divergence from
the intended flightpath and interrupt progression toward a potential upset.
1 This training is incorporated into “Upset Recovery Techniques” in Appendix 1, Section 8.
Par 2-1 Page 5
4/14/15 AC 120-111
e. Completion Criteria for Recovery. Timely action to recover from an upset in
accordance with the air carrier’s procedures, or in the absence thereof, in accordance with
recommendations provided in Chapter 4 of this AC.
• A PF will take action, or a PM will call out the need, for timely execution of
recovery priorities: 1) manage the energy, 2) arrest flightpath divergence, 3) recover
to stabilized flightpath.
• Apply (PF), or monitor (PM), appropriate control actions to recover the aircraft
without exceeding aircraft limitations.
• When an upset is precipitated by stall, recover from the stall before initiating other
recovery actions.
2-3. IMPORTANCE OF THE UPRT INSTRUCTOR. The key to effective UPRT is the
instructor. The safety implications and consequences of applying poor instructional technique, or
providing misleading information, are more significant in UPRT compared with some other
areas of pilot training. Therefore, an essential component in the effective delivery of UPRT is a
properly trained and qualified instructor who possesses sound academic and operational
knowledge.
2-4. INSTRUCTOR REQUIREMENTS (§§ 121.412 and 121.414). UPRT instructors must
meet the following requirements:
• Hold an ATP Certificate and airplane type rating2 in the airplane for which they are
conducting training.
• Successfully complete the certificate holder’s UPRT program as a student and the
UPRT instructor training in paragraph 2-5 below.
• Be able to teach, assess, and debrief the elements included in the training programs they
are conducting.
• Be trained and qualified to conduct training in the FSTD to be used for the training.
2-5. INSTRUCTOR TRAINING. Instructor knowledge of the subject areas below ensures
accurate UPRT and minimizes the risk of negative transfer of training. The focus of instructor
training should be on the practical application of these principles and the evaluation of a pilot’s
understanding of the airplane’s operating characteristics. Instructor training should include the
following and if a regulation is cited, the training is required:
a. Limitations of the FSTD (§ 121.414).
(1) Instructors must complete training on the data and motion limitations for each
specific FSTD used for UPRT with emphasis on areas that have the potential to introduce
negative transfer of training. Training on the limitations of the specific FSTD will enable
instructors to provide upset recovery training consistent with the capabilities and performance of
the specific aircraft type. This comprehensive instructor training will not only increase instructor
2 A second in command pilot type rating issued under part 61, § 61.55 does not meet this requirement.
Par 2-2 Page 6
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
standardization and the quality of upset recovery training, but it will also reduce the risk of
negative training that could easily occur with an untrained instructor.
(2) Instructors should learn to brief and debrief pilots on these limitations.
(3) Negative transfer of training has previously occurred as a result of the instructor’s
lack of knowledge of the limitations of the FSTD. FSTD instructors must be aware that valid
training may be limited to the parameters to which the FSTD has been programmed and
evaluated to conduct. Operating outside of these parameters may result in the FSTD responding
differently than the airplane would to a pilot’s control inputs. Motion cueing information may
not always accurately simulate the associated forces and rates that could be felt in an airplane.
(4) Instructors must have a clear understanding of the FSTD limitations that may
influence UPRT, including:
• The FSTD’s acceptable training envelope;
• G loading awareness/accelerated stall—factors absent from the FSTD’s motion
cueing that could be experienced in flight and the effect on airplane behavior
and recovery considerations; and
• Significant deviations from the FSTD’s validation envelope could result in an
inaccurate FSTD response. While minor excursions from the FSTD’s validation
envelope may not necessarily invalidate the training, instructors should be
aware that the airplane’s response in an actual upset condition may deviate from
what is experienced in the FSTD. Particular upset scenarios should be selected
and evaluated before training takes place to reduce the likelihood of significant
excursions outside of the FSTD’s validation envelope.
(5) Refer to Appendix 3-D, Flight Simulator Information, of the Airplane Upset
Recovery Training Aid (AURTA) Revision 2 for more information.
b. Instructor Operating Station (IOS) Use (§ 121.414). Instructors must complete
training on the proper operation of the controls, systems, and environmental and fault panels for
each specific FSTD used for UPRT. This includes the specific IOS indications and controls that
will be used to provide training and feedback during UPRT events.
c. Minimum FSTD Equipment (§ 121.414). Instructors must complete training on the
minimum FSTD equipment required by parts 60 and 121 for each UPRT event. Instructors must
understand that UPRT must only be conducted if the minimum FSTD equipment is functional;
otherwise, negative transfer of training could occur.
d. Review of Loss of Control In-Flight (LOC-I) Events, Incidents, and Accidents.
Training and review of LOC-I events, incidents, and accidents increases knowledge and skill
development to recognize and to recover from an airplane upset. A review of LOC-I events will
provide pilots with a focus and a context for the consequences of allowing the airplane to
develop into an upset.
Par 2-5 Page 7
4/14/15 AC 120-111
e. Energy Management.
(1) It is important that instructors not only understand energy management but also be
able to apply it as a means of upset prevention. UPRT instructors should be trained on specific
techniques and maneuvers to demonstrate and train energy management principles effectively.
(2) An improper understanding of airplane energy state has contributed to a pilot’s poor
understanding of airplane control. This poor understanding influenced the previous improper
training of stall recovery. It is therefore important that instructors understand how energy
management is a factor in all phases of flight, as well as in UPRT.
f. Spatial Disorientation. Instructors should be trained in a variety of causes of
disorientation, prevention strategies, recognition cues, and recovery from disorientation, because
spatial disorientation training may not be effectively represented in an FSTD.
g. Distraction. UPRT instructors should have an awareness of how distractions can lead
to an airplane upset and how to effectively use distractions in training. Appropriate use of
distractions can also assist the instructor in creating a situation to induce startle. UPRT
instructors should learn about different distractions that can affect a flightcrew, such as:
• Communication,
• Heads-down work,
• Responding to abnormal/unexpected events,
• Searching for traffic,
• Flight deck ergonomics,
• Flight deck noise level,
• English language proficiency (from both the pilots and air traffic control (ATC)),
• Airport infrastructure, and
• Flightcrew fatigue.
h. Recognition and Recovery Strategies. Instructors should be able to convey how to
recognize upset conditions and to apply appropriate recovery strategies. Training should include
specific examples, in both academic discussion and practical demonstration.
i. Recognition and Correction of Pilot Errors. Errors may occur in flight operations if
the errors are not identified and corrected during training. Instructors should be aware of the
consequences of failing to recognize and correct pilot errors. Instructors should be familiar with
common pilot errors, be able to identify the root cause, and provide training to avoid errors and
incorrect inputs that can create undesired aircraft states (such as over controlling for Traffic Alert
and Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) Resolution Advisories).
j. Type-Specific Characteristics. Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) have
recognized that different airplanes have unique characteristics that may both assist in, or deter
from, the recognition and recovery of an airplane upset. UPRT instructors should know specific
unique characteristics regarding airplane handling and recognition, such as how the airplane
responds while approaching stall buffet or the effects of envelope protection.
Par 2-5 Page 8
4/14/15 AC 120-111
k. OEM-Specific Recommendations. Evidence indicates that training programs using
operating procedures from one airplane type may have a detrimental effect if carried over to a
different airplane type. This can lead to an upset. Training should use airplane-specific OEM
recommendations and air carrier procedures developed from OEM recommendations for
prevention and recovery from an upset.
l. Operating Environment. Current training does not always take into consideration the
different handling characteristics in all areas of the operating envelope. Instructors should be
trained in how to demonstrate the effects of the operating environment, as well as how these will
affect the airplane handling characteristics and potentially lead to an airplane upset. This should
include how changes in the environmental conditions will affect the airplane. An example is
showing how thrust available varies significantly with altitude by timing how long it takes to
change speed by 25 knots during level flight at low and high altitude.
m. Startle or Surprise. Because upsets that occur in normal flight operations are
unplanned and inadvertent, pilots may be startled or surprised, adversely impacting recognition
or recovery. Instructors need to plan scenarios to balance potential for startle or surprise while
applying sound judgment with respect to realism and fidelity, and respecting the capabilities and
limitations of the FSTD. It is crucial for the instructor to adopt and foster a spirit of collaborative
learning when inducing startle or surprise so as not to inappropriately attempt to trap a pilot or
destroy confidence in the training session.
n. Benefits of Demonstration in an FSTD. Some elements of UPRT may be more
assessable, trainable, and effective when FSTD instructors demonstrate them from a pilot seat.
o. Assessing Pilot Performance to Completion Standards. Instructors should be able to
assess when an appropriate level of proficiency is achieved. Instructors should be trained on how
to judge pilot performance on the UPRT events and determine whether the required learning
objectives have been met.
2-6. INSTRUCTOR STANDARDIZATION.
a. Initial Standardization Validation. Following completion of UPRT instructor
training, and before providing unsupervised instruction, instructors should complete an Instructor
Standardization validation to ensure readiness to provide accurate UPRT, to include evaluation
of:
• UPRT knowledge and skills applicable to the UPRT for which they are being
standardized.
• Ability to teach, brief, assess, and debrief the elements included in the UPRT for
which they are being standardized.
• FSTD instructor ability to effectively operate the device and all of its available
debriefing capabilities.
• Effective recognition of pilot errors, identification of root cause, and adjustments to
training to correct errors and achieve the required level of proficiency.
• Assess the achievement of an appropriate level of proficiency in accordance with
the completion criteria.
Par 2-5 Page 9
4/14/15 AC 120-111
b. Continuing Standardization. Each air carrier should have a control system in place to
ensure its instructors continuously deliver standardized UPRT. Instructors who do not follow the
curriculum may provide pilots with negative training.
Par 2-6 Page 10
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
CHAPTER 3. TRAINING METHODOLOGY
3-1. GENERAL. The training methodology for UPRT should follow the building block
approach of first introducing essential concepts and academic understanding before progressing
to the practical application of those skills in a flight simulation training device (FSTD).
Similarly, familiarity with airplane characteristics and development of basic recovery skills
through maneuver-based training should precede their application in scenario-based training.
This progressive approach will lead to a more complete appreciation of how to recognize a
developing flightpath divergence, respond appropriately in situations of surprise or startle, and
recover effectively when required. Air carriers should develop training curriculums that provide
pilots with the knowledge and skills to prevent, recognize, and recover from unexpected
flightpath divergences and upset events. These training curriculums should contain the elements
and events described in Appendix 1.
3-2. COMPREHENSIVE AIR CARRIER UPRT PROGRAM.
a. General. The FAA strongly recommends incorporation of the Airplane Upset Recovery
Training Aid (AURTA) Revision 2 into air carrier UPRT programs. The AURTA Revision 2 has
extensive discussion and considerations for both the academic and flight training portion of an
air carrier’s training program. The AURTA Revision 2 is available online at
https://www.faa.gov/sites/faa.gov/files/pilots/training/AP_UpsetRecovery_Book.pdf.
b. Flight Standardization Board Reports (FSBR). When developing UPRT programs,
air carriers should consult the FSBR, if available, for the specific airplane type. The Special
Emphasis Areas, and any other recommendations pertaining to in-flight aircraft handling, should
be reviewed.
c. Academic Knowledge. Academic instruction establishes the foundation from which
situational awareness, insight, knowledge, and skills are developed, and therefore must be
accomplished prior to training the associated flight events in an FSTD. To ensure sufficient
retention, FSTD training should occur within a reasonable time after academic training.
Academic knowledge should proceed from the general to the specific.
d. FSTD Training. Section 121.423 requires extended envelope training, which consists
of the following maneuvers to be conducted in a Level C or higher full flight simulator (FFS):
manually controlled slow flight, manually controlled loss of reliable airspeed, manually
controlled instrument departure and arrival, and upset recovery maneuvers. Other flight training
that is part of UPRT, but not required by regulation to be conducted in an FFS, may be
conducted in another type of FSTD; however, the FSTD should have the level of fidelity
required to meet the learning objective. Training providers are encouraged to use the highest
level FFS available when developing their UPRT curriculums. The primary emphasis is to
provide the pilot with the most realistic environment possible during UPRT. Motion in an FFS
should be used when those cues influence recognition or recovery.
(1) FSTD flight training should follow a logical progression where pilots are introduced
to the airplane’s capabilities within the operating limits prior to training at the edge of the normal
flight envelope, or beyond. While exceeding the normal flight envelope in an FFS is possible, all
Par 3-1 Page 11
4/14/15 AC 120-111
UPRT maneuvers contained in this AC can typically be conducted inside the FFS’s intended
training envelope where the performance and handling qualities of the FFS are at their highest
accuracy. Training that exceeds the airplane envelope or the aerodynamic modeling envelope
could increase the risk of negative transfer of training. Significant sustained accelerations and
rates are not possible in an FFS, and instructors should be able to explain to pilots how the actual
aircraft behavior may differ. See Appendix 3 for detailed FSTD considerations.
(2) FSTD training should include both maneuver-based and scenario-based training. Air
carriers are encouraged to consult with the airplane manufacturer during the development of the
FSTD training.
(a) Maneuver-Based Training. This training focuses on task mastery. Maneuver
based training should include prevention and recovery training with an emphasis on the
development of required motor skills to satisfactorily accomplish upset recovery. Limited
emphasis should be placed on decision-making skills during maneuver-based training.
(b) Scenario-Based Training (SBT). The goal of SBT is to develop perception and
decision-making skills relating to upset prevention, recognition, and recovery, while providing
the pilot with an opportunity to use the skills learned in maneuver-based training in a realistic
scenario. SBT would normally be used after maneuver-based training, during the later stages of
an initial, transition, conversion, or upgrade training curriculum, and during recurrent training.
1. Realistic Scenarios. UPRT scenarios should be realistic events that could be
encountered in operational conditions. When possible, scenarios should include accident,
incident, Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP), Flight Operational Quality Assurance
(FOQA), and/or Aviation Safety Reporting System (ASRS) data to convey how threat situations
may develop and how they should be managed. Sample SBT lesson plans are provided in
Appendix 2.
2. Briefing. Pilots should not normally be briefed that they are receiving SBT.
The concept allows pilots to recognize and manage upset threats as they develop during normal
operations.
3-3. KEY UPRT CONSIDERATIONS.
a. Awareness and Prevention. Training with an emphasis on awareness and prevention
provides pilots with the skills to recognize conditions that increase the likelihood of an upset
event if not effectively managed. Training must include the air carrier’s standard operating
procedures (SOP) and Crew Resource Management (CRM) techniques for the most effective
prevention and threat mitigation strategies. Desired goals for awareness and prevention training
include the following:
(1) Recognition of operational and environmental conditions that increase the
likelihood of an upset event occurring;
(2) Aeronautical decision-making skills to prevent upsets (e.g., effective analysis,
awareness, resource management, mitigation strategies, and breaking the error chain through
airmanship and sound judgment);
Par 3-2 Page 12
4/14/15 AC 120-111
(3) Early detection of flightpath divergences;
(4) Timely and appropriate intervention;
(5) The effects of autoflight including mode confusion, flight envelope protection in
normal and degraded modes, and unexpected disconnects of the autopilot or
autothrottle/autothrust;
(6) Recognition of when the flight condition has transitioned from the prevention phase
into the recovery phase; and
(7) Effective verbal and nonverbal communication regarding the airplane state.
b. Manual Flight Operations Knowledge, Skills, and Utilization. Modern aircraft are
commonly operated using autoflight systems (e.g., autopilot or autothrottle/autothrust) during
most of a flight. Autoflight systems have improved safety, reduced workload, and enabled more
precise operations; however, continuous use of autoflight systems could lead to degradation of
the pilot’s manual handling skills and ability to recover the aircraft from an upset.
NOTE: Air carriers are encouraged to take an integrated approach by
incorporating manual flight operations into both line operations and training
(initial, transition, conversion, upgrade, requalification, and recurrent).
(1) Training. Several maneuvers are included in Appendix 1 specifically to develop
and maintain a pilot’s manual flight operations knowledge and skills.
(2) Operations. Air carriers should develop policies that encourage manual flight
operations when appropriate. Operational policies should be developed or reviewed to ensure
there are appropriate opportunities for pilots to exercise manual flying skills, such as in
non-Reduced Vertical Separation Minimum (RVSM) airspace and during low workload
conditions. In addition, policies should be developed or reviewed to ensure that pilots understand
when to use the automated systems, such as during high workload conditions or for airspace
procedures that require precise operations. Augmented crew operations may also limit the ability
of some pilots to obtain practice in manual flight operations. Airline operational policies should
ensure that all pilots have the appropriate opportunities to exercise manual flight knowledge and
skills in flight operations.
(3) Use of Autopilot and/or Autothrottle/Autothrust for Upset Recovery. Leaving
the autopilot or autothrottle/autothrust connected may result in inadvertent changes or
adjustments that may not be easily recognized or appropriate, especially during high workload
situations.
c. Availability of Visual References. The CAST study of 18 accidents and incidents
resulting from pilot loss of airplane state awareness determined that 17 accidents and incidents
occurred when pilots did not have visual references available (i.e., instrument meteorological
conditions (IMC) or night). In the past, unusual attitude training was commonly conducted in
visual meteorological conditions, giving the pilot considerable advantage in determining the
appropriate recovery. To develop a pilot’s ability to recover from an upset, FSTD maneuvers
Par 3-3 Page 13
4/14/15 AC 120-111
training should be done in both visual and instrument conditions, as well as in day and night.
This allows pilots to practice recognition and recovery under all conditions in order to experience
important physiological factors.
d. Pilot Monitoring. Evidence shows that in many loss of control in-flight (LOC-I)
incidents and accidents the pilot(s) monitoring (PM) may have been more aware of the airplane
state than the pilot flying (PF). Training should emphasize crew interaction (including
augmented flightcrews) to vocalize a divergence from the intended flightpath. A progressive
intervention strategy is initiated by communicating a flightpath deviation (alert), then suggesting
a course of action (advocacy and assertion), and then directly intervening, if necessary, by taking
the controls to prevent an incident or accident. A pilot taking control should announce the
transfer of control.
e. Startle or Surprise. Startle or surprise has been a factor in LOC-I incidents and
accidents as upsets that occur in normal operations are unplanned and inadvertent, adversely
impacting recognition or recovery. Instructors should plan upset scenarios emphasizing those
event conditions and variables likely to result in startle/surprise while minimizing potential for
negative transfer of training. The potential for negative transfer of training can be minimized
through applying sound judgment with respect to realism and fidelity, as well as respecting the
capabilities and limitations of the FSTD. The following points should be considered:
• Many possible events should be available for use during training. Otherwise, pilots
will anticipate the event and not be surprised.
• The events should be taught in a supportive learning environment without jeopardy.
Otherwise, incentives are introduced for pilots to share with other pilots what to
expect.
• Even if incentives are not introduced, pilots should be discouraged from revealing
information about the events to other pilots that have yet to experience them.
Divulging a surprise scenario removes the benefit of allowing a colleague to
examine their thoughts and responses in critical situations that arise in training. As
such, the strategic objective of inserting these scenarios in training should be
emphasized for the benefit of all.
• Instructors will have to be inventive and introduce various ploys to achieve a startle
or surprise response in simulation. Managing expectations in this way can help
achieve responses while surprised even in simulation environments when the fear of
harm does not exist.
Par 3-3 Page 14
4/14/15 AC 120-111
CHAPTER 4. UPSET RECOVERY TEMPLATE
4-1. METHODOLOGY. Airplane manufacturers (Airbus, ATR Aircraft, Boeing, Bombardier,
and Embraer) contributed to the development of the following upset recovery templates that
provide commonality among various airplanes.
4-2. UPSET RECOVERY TEMPLATES. Tables 1 and 2 show the Nose High and Nose Low
Upset Recovery Templates that were developed with input from the above manufacturers.
Although the procedures apply to the majority of today’s airplanes, manufacturer-recommended
procedures may deviate from those included in this advisory circular (AC) due to specific
airplane characteristics. Manufacturer recommendations may deviate from this template if
necessary due to airplane operating characteristics. For air carriers operating airplanes without
manufacturer upset recovery procedures, the FAA recommends using the upset recovery
templates as a reference when developing air carrier-specific upset recovery procedures.
NOTE: The manufacturer’s procedures take precedence over the
recommendations in this AC.
NOTE: These techniques assume the airplane is not stalled. If the airplane is
stalled, recovery from the stall must be accomplished first in accordance with
the current edition of AC 120-109, Stall Prevention and Recovery Training,
or manufacturer procedures.
a. The following techniques represent a logical progression for recovering the airplane.
While not strictly procedural, the templates represent a consensus view of actions for recovery.
b. If needed, use pitch trim sparingly. Careful use of rudder to aid roll control should be
considered only if roll control is ineffective.
c. This section uses the following acronyms: AP for autopilot and A/THR for
autothrottle/autothrust.
Par 4-1 Page 15
4/14/15 AC 120-111
TABLE 1. NOSE HIGH RECOVERY TEMPLATE
Either Pilot:
Recognize and confirm the developing situation. Announce: “Nose High”
Pilot Flying Pilot Monitoring
AP: DISCONNECT3 MONITOR airspeed and attitude throughout the
recovery and ANNOUNCE any continued
A/THR: OFF
divergence.
PITCH: Apply as much nose-down control
input as required to obtain a nose-down pitch
rate.
THRUST: Adjust (if required)
When airspeed is sufficiently increasing:
RECOVER to level flight. 4
NOTE: Recovery to level flight may require use of pitch trim.
NOTE: If necessary, consider reducing thrust in airplanes with
underwing-mounted engines to aid in achieving nose-down pitch rate.
WARNING: Excessive use of pitch trim or rudder may aggravate the upset
situation or may result in high structural loads.
3 A large out-of-trim condition could be encountered when the AP is disconnected.
4 Avoid stall because of premature recovery or excessive G loading.
Par 4-2 Page 16
4/14/15 AC 120-111
TABLE 2. NOSE LOW RECOVERY TEMPLATE
Either Pilot:
Recognize and confirm the developing situation. Announce: “Nose Low”
Pilot Flying Pilot Monitoring
AP: DISCONNECT5 MONITOR airspeed and attitude throughout the
recovery and ANNOUNCE any continued
A/THR: OFF
divergence.
RECOVER from stall if required.
ROLL6 in the shortest direction to wings
level.
THRUST and DRAG: Adjust (if required)
RECOVER to level flight. 7
NOTE: Recovery to level flight may require use of pitch trim.
WARNING: Excessive use of pitch trim or rudder may aggravate the upset
situation or may result in high structural loads.
5 A large out-of-trim condition could be encountered when the AP is disconnected.
6 It may be necessary to reduce the G loading by applying forward control pressure to improve roll effectiveness.
7 Avoid stall because of premature recovery or excessive G loading.
Par 4-2 Page 17
4/14/15 AC 120-111
TABLE 3. NOSE HIGH RECOVERY TEMPLATE WITH EXPLANATION
Either Pilot: Recognize and confirm the developing situation. Announce: “Nose High”
Explanation: A critical element in recognition and confirmation is to clearly understand the
energy state and the rate to which it is changing because this will have an effect on how the PF
handles the recovery.
Pilot Flying
AP: DISCONNECT8
A/THR: OFF
Explanation: Leaving the autopilot or autothrottle/autothrust connected may result in
inadvertent changes or adjustments that may not be easily recognized or appropriate, especially
during high workload situations.
PITCH: Apply as much nose-down control input as required to obtain a nose-down pitch rate.
Explanation: This may require as much as full nose-down input. If a sustained column force is
required to obtain the desired response, use nose-down trim as needed to counter high stick
forces.
If nose-down inputs are not successful in achieving a nose-down pitch rate, pitch may be
controlled by rolling the airplane. A large bank angle is helpful in reducing excessively high
pitch attitudes. The angle of bank should not normally exceed approximately 60°. Continuous
nose-down elevator pressure will keep the wing angle of attack low, which will make the
normal roll controls effective. The rolling maneuver changes the pitch rate into a turning
maneuver, allowing the pitch to decrease.
THRUST: Adjust (if required)
Explanation: Combined with pitch trim, an additional effective method for achieving a
nose-down pitch rate on airplanes with under-wing-mounted engines can be to reduce the
power. Thrust should only be reduced to the point where control of the pitch is achieved. This
reduces the upward pitch moment. In fact, in some situations for some airplane models, it may
be necessary to reduce thrust to prevent the angle of attack from continuing to increase.
If the pitch rate is being managed by trim and elevator inputs, it is not recommended to reduce
thrust.
8 A large out-of-trim condition could be encountered when the AP is disconnected.
Par 4-2 Page 18
4/14/15 AC 120-111
TABLE 3. NOSE HIGH RECOVERY TEMPLATE WITH EXPLANATION
(CONTINUED)
RECOVER to level flight9 when airspeed is sufficiently increasing.
Explanation: Recover to slightly nose-low attitude to reduce the potential for entering another
upset. Roll to wings level, if necessary, as the nose approaches the horizon. Check airspeed, and
adjust thrust and pitch as necessary.
Pilot Monitoring
MONITOR airspeed and attitude throughout the recovery and ANNOUNCE any continued
divergence.
Explanation: Evidence shows that the PM is often in a better position than the PF to recognize
adverse trends in airplane state or flight parameters.
9 Avoid stall because of premature recovery or excessive G loading.
Par 4-2 Page 19
4/14/15 AC 120-111
TABLE 4. NOSE LOW RECOVERY TEMPLATE WITH EXPLANATION
Either Pilot:
Recognize and confirm the developing situation. Announce: “Nose Low”
Explanation: A critical element in recognition and confirmation is to clearly understand the
energy state and the rate to which it is changing because this will have an effect on how the PF
handles the recovery.
Pilot Flying
AP: DISCONNECT10
A/THR: OFF
Explanation: Leaving the autopilot or autothrottle/autothrust connected may result in
inadvertent changes or adjustments that may not be easily recognized or appropriate, especially
during high workload situations.
RECOVER from stall if required.
Explanation: Even in a nose-low, low-speed situation, the airplane may be stalled at a
relatively low pitch. It is necessary to recover from the stall first. This may require nose-down
elevator, which may not be intuitive.
ROLL11 in the shortest direction to wings level.
Explanation: Full aileron and spoiler input may be necessary to smoothly establish a recovery
roll rate toward the nearest horizon. It is important that positive G force not be increased or that
nose-up elevator or stabilizer trim be used until the airplane approaches wings level. It may be
necessary to unload the airplane by decreasing backpressure to improve roll effectiveness. If the
airplane has exceeded 90° of bank, it may feel like “pushing” in order to unload. It is necessary
to unload to improve roll control and to prevent pointing a large lift vector toward the ground.
THRUST and DRAG: Adjust (if required)
Explanation: If airspeed is low, apply thrust; if airspeed is high, reduce thrust and, if
necessary, extend speedbrakes.
RECOVER to level flight.12
Explanation: Complete the recovery by establishing a pitch, thrust, and airplane drag device
configuration that corresponds to the desired airspeed.
10 A large out-of-trim condition could be encountered when the AP is disconnected.
11 It may be necessary to reduce the G loading by applying forward control pressure to improve roll effectiveness.
12 Avoid stall because of premature recovery or excessive G loading.
Par 4-2 Page 20
4/14/15 AC 120-111
TABLE 4. NOSE LOW RECOVERY TEMPLATE WITH EXPLANATION
(CONTINUED)
Pilot Monitoring
MONITOR airspeed and attitude throughout the recovery and ANNOUNCE any continued
divergence.
Explanation: Evidence shows that the PM is often in a better position to recognize adverse
trends in airplane state or flight parameters than the PF.
NOTE: Recovery to level flight may require use of pitch trim.
WARNING: Excessive use of pitch trim or rudder may aggravate the upset
situation or may result in high structural loads.
Par 4-2 Page 21 (and 22)
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
APPENDIX 1. TRAINING ELEMENTS AND EVENTS
1. Aerodynamics
Academic a. General Aerodynamics:
• Aerodynamic flight envelope.
• Load factor.
• Directional and lateral control.
• Weight and balance effects on handling.
• Trim.
• Sideslip.
b. Advanced Aerodynamics:
• Lift versus drag (L/D) curve, L/D Max in particular, and significance
on airplane performance in general.
• Relationship between L/D curve and airspeed.
• Airplane energy state and its application in various flight altitudes,
airspeeds, and attitudes.
• Optimum climb speed, crossover altitude, optimum altitude, and
maximum altitude as they relate to airplane performance and the effect
of deviations (environmental or airplane) on performance.
• Thrust required versus thrust available.
• Thrust-limited conditions and recovery.
• Aerodynamic stability and its effects in flight including maneuvering
stability and characteristics at high and low altitude; environmental
impact on aerodynamics and handling (e.g., temperature, ice, etc.).
c. Airplane Performance (high and low altitude):
• Use of airplane (type-specific) performance charts to determine the
effects of environmental, airplane configuration, or system changes on
planned flight performance.
• Training pilots to understand that an airplane may not be able to reach
its maximum certified altitude depending on performance at the time of
the flight is critical. Pilots should also understand the possible
consequences of choosing a cruising altitude that exceeds the airplane’s
performance capabilities for the conditions existing at the time of the
flight.
• Recognition of the different flight deck cues between low-speed buffet
and high-speed buffet.
Page 1
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
d. Type-specific aerodynamics:
• Angle of attack (AOA) awareness including:
• Importance of AOA as it relates to airplane performance and wing stall
angle.
• Effect of airplane configuration (e.g., flaps, gear, leading edge slats,
speedbrakes, and thrust/power setting) on stall margins and stall
characteristics.
• AOA relationship to various airplane systems, particularly warning
systems (e.g., stall warning, stick shaker, stick pusher, etc.).
• General and airplane-specific AOA knowledge.
• Impact of environmental and system factors on AOA indications and
their relationship to the stall AOA and various airplane warning
systems (e.g., type-specific knowledge of the stall warning system).
• AOA indications, if presented to the pilot.
• Airplane-specific handling to use AOA-derived information to prevent
or recover from an upset (including stall).
e. Mach effects including:
• Mach tuck and Mach buffet and the reason for them.
• Buffet-limited max altitude.
• Critical Mach number and aerodynamic forces acting on the wing at
critical Mach.
• Control surface effectiveness at high speed.
Note: Training for AOA and Mach effects should only be
accomplished to the extent of their applicability to the
specific airplane.
Flight The FSTD training should be accomplished at both high altitudes (within
5,000 ft. of the service ceiling of the airplane), and low altitude (below
10,000 ft. above ground level (AGL)). Use of normal operational cruise
altitudes for high-altitude training should be encouraged. To fully understand
the concepts discussed in academic training, pilots should demonstrate the
following:
• Recognize buffet (if applicable to airplane type), when encountered.
• Maneuvering at high altitudes at various speeds and automation levels
applying the aerodynamic principles studied to prevent an upset.
• Awareness of the AOA from available data shown on the flight deck
(e.g., barber pole on speed tape, pitch-limit indicator, flight-path
symbol relative to pitch attitude, etc.) and demonstrate the use of those
data to prevent an upset or recover from one.
• Demonstrate knowledge of the type-specific systems that use AOA
inputs with emphasis on warning systems and the limitations of those
systems.
Page 2
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
• Speed controlled by elevator inputs or speed controlled by thrust,
airplane energy state as it pertains to the type being flown, and
demonstrate use of that knowledge to prevent or recover from an upset.
• Roll rate performance of the airplane at different speeds and different
configurations and with flight spoilers retracted/extended if a
difference exists.
• Pitch rate performance of the airplane at different speeds, different
configurations, and with flaps retracted/extended.
• Demonstrate an aft center of gravity (CG) versus forward CG if flight
qualities are significantly different.
Additional details regarding these areas can be found in the Airplane Upset
Recovery Training Aid (AURTA) Revision 2, section 2.5. While the AURTA
was designed for swept-wing airplanes with more than 100 seats, the general
concepts are still applicable to most high-performance airplanes.
2. G Awareness
Academic The effects of G’s, especially during airplane upsets. Emphasize that
G-loading in transport category airplanes feels significantly more pronounced
than in simulation. Airline pilots are normally uncomfortable (for the sake of
passenger comfort and safety) with aggressively loading or unloading the
G forces on a large passenger airplane. This inhibition must be overcome when
faced with the necessity to quickly and sometimes aggressively maneuver the
airplane. Most FFSs cannot replicate sustained load factors greater or less
than 1G; therefore, the flight deck situation must be envisioned during flight
different from 1G. The pilot may feel significantly heavier or lighter in the seat
for moderate durations. It may be difficult to reach the rudder pedals.
Unsecured items may be flying around the flight deck. However, it should be
emphasized that it should not normally be necessary to maneuver at less
than 0G.
Flight Incorporated into Section 8, Upset Recovery Techniques, below.
3. Energy Management
Academic • The interrelationship between kinetic energy (airspeed), potential
energy (altitude), and chemical energy (power).
• How the airplane gets in a high- or low-energy state and the input
options available to change the energy state to a stable and safe state.
• How external factors can change energy state and how to correct for
them.
• What parameters to focus on to decide an appropriate response;
crosscheck with the other pilot to establish a shared understanding.
• What to monitor during an event and how the pilot monitoring (PM)
should assist the pilot flying (PF) in the recovery using appropriate
callouts and other verbal feedback.
Page 3
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
Flight This training should include integrated Crew Resource Management (CRM)
training for developing crew knowledge and skills for energy management and
techniques for reducing pilot error. To fully understand the concepts discussed
in academic training, pilots should demonstrate the following:
• Acceleration between two speeds of which the airplane is capable at
low altitude, medium, and high altitude (e.g., accelerating between
200 and 250 knots at low altitude and high altitude, which corresponds
to Mach changes at high altitude) to demonstrate changes in available
thrust.
• Acceleration performance from region of reversed command (back side
of power curve) at low altitude and high altitude.
• The relationship between Maximum Cruise/Climb/Continuous Thrust
and takeoff/go-around (TOGA) power settings at high altitude.
• Acceleration capabilities through descent versus power application.
• Wake vortex encounter behind a heavy airplane in takeoff and
approach configuration.
4. Flightpath Management
Academic Flightpath and energy management systems: Pilots should have a thorough
understanding of the normal operation, failure modes and effects, and system
integration effects of flightpath and energy management systems. Training on
flightpath and energy management systems should include:
• Normal system operation and limitations.
• Indications and modes, including crosscheck and verification of mode
use and understanding of how a specific mode will command the
airplane; interoperability with other systems.
• Failure modes and effects.
• Common model-specific failures.
• Common errors to avoid and why they occur.
• The importance of ensuring correct inputs to the automated systems for
flightpath management and the consequences of failing to do so.
• Understanding of type-specific characteristics to prevent inadvertent
LOC-I events because of automation surprise (e.g., vertical speed (VS)
or indicated airspeed (IAS) modes based on altitude).
• System review when conducting recurrent training.
• Knowledge of pitch attitudes, power settings, and airspeeds for
common configurations and different phases of flight, as applicable to
the airplane type.
Manual Flight Operations:
• Primary and alternate control strategies.
• Nonintuitive factors. For example, it may be counterintuitive to use
greater unloading control forces when recovering from a high AOA,
especially at low altitudes.
Page 4
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
• Additionally, for under-wing-mounted engines it may be necessary to
reduce thrust in order to reduce the AOA due to the strong pitch up
forces from added thrust.
• Specific aspects of the transition from automated to manual flight
including transition from using a flight director to “raw data,” as
applicable.
Flight Training should include abnormal operating conditions, reliance on primary
flight instruments, manual flying skills, and edge-of-envelope operating
conditions that could be encountered during routine operations. Examples
include:
• Takeoff at high weight and aft/forward CG limits.
• Recognition and recovery from low-airspeed/energy condition in
approach/landing configuration.
• Recognition and recovery from low-airspeed/energy condition near the
service ceiling.
• Climb-to, steady state, and descent from service ceiling.
• Unplanned transition from automated to manual flight, including
transition from using a flight director to “raw data,” as applicable.
5. Causes and Contributing Factors of Upsets
Academic • Environmentally induced upsets, which could be caused by turbulence,
mountain wave, wind shear, thunderstorms, microbursts, or airplane
icing.
• Pilot-induced upsets which could be caused by misinterpretation or
slow instrument crosscheck, improper adjustment of attitude and
power, improper pilot input, inattention, distractions, spatial
disorientation, pilot incapacitation, misunderstanding of autoflight
modes or improper use of automated systems, transition from
automated to manual modes due to system disconnect, and
pilot-induced oscillation (PIO).
• Mechanically induced upsets that could be caused by flight instrument
anomalies/failures, autoflight anomalies/failures, flight control
malfunctions/failures, or other system anomalies.
• Common illusions (e.g., somatogravic illusion, the leans, Coriolis
illusion, etc.) associated with LOC-I events. It should be explained
why they occur and the importance of following procedure to avoid
susceptibility to illusions.
• Situations resulting in an upset due to a lack of visual cues such as a
sub-threshold roll (i.e., imperceptible roll rate, generally less than
three degrees per second).
Flight Not applicable
Page 5
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
6. Review of Accidents and Incidents Relating to Airplane Upsets
Academic Review of accidents and incidents related to transport category airplane upsets
with focus on an understanding of the events leading to the upset, proper or
improper decision-making actions that contributed to the upset, and, if
applicable, recovery. Aviation Safety Action Program (ASAP), Flight
Operational Quality Assurance (FOQA), and Aviation Safety Reporting
System (ASRS) data can also support this discussion.
Flight Not applicable
7. Recognition
Academic a. Type-specific examples of instrument indications during developing
and developed upset.
• Visual representations of the outside view and type-specific instrument
indications of a variety of developing and developed upset conditions,
with a focus on pitch, power, roll, and speed trend. Pilots should be
provided context for each event in order for them to identify the
divergence.
• Some normal situations should also be included so pilots can identify
what is normal versus what is not.
• If applicable, discuss other cues, such as audio or buffet cues.
b. Pitch/Power/Roll/Yaw
• Pilots must have a fundamental understanding of instrumentation and
flight dynamics in pitch, power, roll, and yaw in order to recognize the
current state of the airplane and make the correct control inputs to
arrest the divergence or recover from the upset.
• The use of the AURTA Revision 2, sections 2.5.5.5–2.5.5.9, is
recommended for specific details for training pitch/power/roll/yaw.
c. Effective Scanning
• Effective instrument scanning techniques should be trained, as
appropriate, to recognize normal states and divergence from normal
flight parameters.
• To prevent flightpath divergences related to improper monitoring of
airplane state, pilots should be trained during all phases of flight on
what to monitor and when, crosschecking, and verification.
d. CRM techniques for working as a crew to return the airplane to normal
flight and communicating airplane state between pilots, including CRM
callouts to improve situational awareness.
• Evidence shows that the PM is often in a better position to recognize
adverse trends in airplane state or flight parameters than the pilot
flying (PF).
• The PM should be tasked with active monitoring of aircraft state and
flight parameters and prompt callout of any divergence from planned
and/or briefed flightpath.
Page 6
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
Flight The academic principles of recognition should be continuously reinforced by
the instructor during flight training.
8. Upset Recovery Techniques
Academic • Emphasize timely and appropriate intervention.
• Emphasize that recovery to a stabilized flightpath should be initiated as
soon as a divergence from intended flightpath is recognized.
• Emphasize the need for the PF or PM to recognize a divergence as
early as possible, and immediately ensure corrective action is taken to
return the airplane to a stabilized flightpath rather than waiting until the
airplane has developed into an established upset.
• The use of an intervention strategy employed by the PM that
progresses from alerting the PF of a divergence from the intended
flightpath, to suggesting a course of action (advocacy and assertion),
and proceeds to directly intervening by taking the controls to prevent
an accident or incident. In the event that a pilot intervenes by taking
control of the airplane, they should announce the transfer of control.
• The attitude direction indicator (ADI), attitude display of the primary
flight display (PFD), or Head-Up Display (HUD), as applicable, is the
primary control instrument for recovery from an upset.
• Due to varying visibility conditions, pilots cannot depend on having
adequate outside visual references.
• Air carriers and Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEM) may
already have policies on how to handle minor divergence from the
desired flightpath for items such as bank, airspeed, heading, etc.,
including callouts. The intent of these procedures or CRM techniques
is for the PM to draw attention to any divergence that exceeds
parameters set by the company and for the PF to take corrective action.
• Control inputs to counter a developing upset must be smooth, positive,
and proportional to the amount and rate of pitch, roll, or yaw
experienced.
• Up to full-scale control deflections may be necessary; however,
initiating recovery with arbitrary full-scale control deflections could
aggravate the situation. An aircraft’s response to excessive or
inappropriate control input that overshoots the desired response can
startle or surprise the pilot and cause one upset to lead to another.
The use of the AURTA Revision 2, sections 2.6.3.2–2.6.3.5, is recommended
for details to train the academic portion of the recovery techniques for the
four elements below. For instructional purposes, the AURTA Revision 2
addresses several different airplane upset situations (listed below). This
provides the basis for relating the aerodynamic information and techniques to
specific situations.
• Nose-High/Wings-level recovery.
• Nose-Low/Wings-level recovery.
Page 7
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
• High Bank-Angle Recovery Techniques.
• Consolidated Summary of Airplane Recovery Techniques.
Flight The nose-high and nose-low maneuvers in Chapter 4, Tables 1 and 2, should
be practiced first in maneuver-based training, followed by scenario-based
training (SBT). For the recovery from the nose-high upset, pilots are instructed
to push to achieve less than 1G.
Note: Rudder control is still effective at a high AOA, and
special care must be taken in the use of rudder during upset
prevention and recovery. It is important to guard against
control reversals. To maintain structural integrity, avoid
rapid full-scale reversal of control deflections.
During this training, the instructor should:
• Use the Instructor Operating Station (IOS) to track G-load and other
flight parameters during recovery;
• Provide specific feedback if recovery was too aggressive,
i.e., structural or other flight limits were exceeded during recovery;
• Provide specific feedback if recovery was insufficiently positive,
i.e., recovery was delayed or impaired due to insufficient control
inputs;
• Provide specific feedback if recovery control inputs were excessive, or
cyclic with control reversals; and
• After the pilot uses the correct amount of force to recover, note that the
absence of G-load sensing in the FSTD may lead to a tendency to
undercontrol recovery in the actual aircraft when these loads are
sensed.
Page 8
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
9. Specialized Flight Training Elements for Upset Prevention
Flight Sections 121.424, 121.426, and 121.427 require initial, transition, conversion,
upgrade, and recurrent training to include the extended envelope training in
§ 121.423. Each maneuver or procedure listed below is required by § 121.423,
except steep turns, which are required by part 121 appendix E, and teaches a
specific skill set to help pilots build their manual handling skills and prevent
upsets.
• Manually controlled slow flight: The target speed for slow flight
should be below the minimum drag speed for the configuration. Slow
flight exposes the pilot to flight just above the stall speed and how to
maneuver the airplane at this speed, in situations other than an
approach, without stalling. The purpose is to reinforce the basic stall
characteristics learned in academics and allow the pilot to obtain
handling experience and motion sensations when operating the airplane
at slow speeds in the impending regime in various airplane attitudes,
configurations, bank angles, and altitudes, including high altitudes.
• Steep turns: Steep turns provide the pilot with some practical
experience of the consequences of load factor and maneuvering the
airplane at higher-than-normal bank angles.
• Manually controlled loss of reliable airspeed (See Appendix 2,
Scenario 2): The training of an airspeed indication system malfunction
is critical for a pilot’s understanding of type-specific failure modes.
Additionally, cascading failure of other dependent systems provides a
training environment, which allows a pilot to practice manually
handling an aircraft with varying degrees of automation and
capabilities that may be present during upset. In many instances, the
loss of reliable airspeed results in an aircraft which must be flown
primarily by relying on pitch and power. Further, these maneuvers
require an understanding of the aerodynamic qualities of large transport
category aircraft.
• Manually controlled instrument departure and arrival: Modern aircraft
are commonly operated using autoflight systems (e.g., autopilot or
autothrottle/autothrust). Autoflight systems are useful tools and have
improved safety and workload management, and thus enable more
precise operations; however, continuous use of autoflight systems
could lead to degradation of the pilot’s ability to quickly recover the
aircraft from an undesired state.
Page 9
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 1
10. System Malfunctions
Academic • Understanding of airplane systems and how system malfunctions can
contribute to an upset.
• Air carriers should refer to OEM checklists and procedures, which
cover system and component failures.
• Review additional information from the AURTA Revision 2,
section 2.4.2.
Flight System malfunctions can contribute to an upset. FSTDs allow instructors to
safely induce malfunctions that would not be possible in the airplane.
Failures/malfunctions related to systems, instruments, power, and automation
should all be incorporated into training, whenever applicable. Inaccurate
information, if possible, should also be part of the training program
(e.g., unreliable airspeed), so pilots learn to recognize the error, prevent an
upset, and maintain control of the airplane.
11. Normal and Degraded Modes for Envelope Protected Airplanes
Academic • Understanding of normal modes of envelope protection, as well as all
possible degraded modes of envelope protection.
• Comprehensive information regarding envelope protection is available
from the aircraft manufacturer.
• Air carriers must adequately train pilots on the varied effects of
envelope protection during normal, abnormal, and emergency
situations. For part 121 operations, the requirements are listed under
§ 121.419(a)(2)(v), 121.420, and 121.427; part 121 appendix E and
appendix F; and § 121.913 for Advanced Qualification
Programs (AQP).
• Consideration of the Flight Standardization Board Report (FSBR) is
recommended. This report may contain additional training
requirements, specific to aircraft type, not contained in the CFRs or
manufacturer documentation.
Flight Demonstrate flight envelope protection in normal and degraded modes.
Highlight the differences in symbology, instrumentation, and flight
characteristics, as appropriate.
Page 10
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
APPENDIX 2. SAMPLE TRAINING SCENARIOS AND MANEUVERS
Three scenarios were constructed using the philosophies and concepts described in this advisory
circular (AC). Training providers are encouraged to develop additional scenarios that fit their
training needs. The examples should be easily tailored to any transport category airplane. The
examples given are not intended to be limiting; they are provided as a framework for developing
a training curriculum.
NOTE: The manufacturer’s procedures take precedence over the
recommendations in this AC.
EXAMPLES OF SCENARIOS AND MANEUVERS FOR UPSET PREVENTION AND
RECOVERY TRAINING
SCENARIO 1: NOSE-HIGH ATTITUDE IN AN AIRPLANE WITH
UNDER-WING-MOUNTED ENGINES
INSTRUCTOR ROLE Implement scenarios that result in an unexpected nose-high
attitude (40° or greater) with full power.
OBJECTIVE This scenario is ONLY for airplanes with
under-wing-mounted engines. The pilot will recognize the
nose-high attitude and immediately perform the upset
recovery procedure. If a detectable nose-down pitch rate is
not initially achievable, the pilot should demonstrate
recovery by reducing the thrust to a point where a
nose-down pitch rate is achieved.
EMPHASIS AREAS • Effect of thrust on pitch moment.
• Recognition and recovery.
• Crew coordination.
• Angle of attack (AOA) management, including
available AOA indications.
• Aural and visual warnings (environment and
airplane cueing).
• Surprise and startle.
• Situational awareness while returning to desired
flightpath after the upset recovery, including such
items as heading, altitude, other aircraft, and flight
deck automation.
FSTD SETUP In order to create potential onset conditions, consider use
CONSIDERATIONS of the following:
• System malfunctions resulting in erroneous pitch
attitude indications;
Page 1
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
SCENARIO 1: NOSE-HIGH ATTITUDE IN AN AIRPLANE WITH
UNDER-WING-MOUNTED ENGINES
• Other system malfunctions resulting in a nose-high
attitude; and
• Realistic environmental threats destabilizing the
flightpath.
SCENARIO ELEMENTS • Upon recognizing the first indication of an upset,
perform the upset recovery procedure.
• The necessity for smooth, deliberate, and positive
control inputs to avoid increasing load factors.
• Reducing thrust, if necessary, can reduce the
upward pitch moment.
COMPLETION STANDARDS • Recognizes and confirms the situation.
• Initiates recovery by reducing thrust to
approximately midrange until a detectable
nose-down pitch rate is achieved.
• Verifies the autopilot and autothrottle/autothrust
are disconnected.
• Proper recovery consists of up to full nose-down
elevator and by using stabilizer trim, if required. A
steady nose-down pitch rate should be achieved,
and it should be noted that the airplane would be
less than 1G and the associated characteristics of
such.
• When approaching the horizon, the pilot checks
airspeed, adjusts thrust, and establishes the
appropriate pitch attitude and stabilizer trim setting
for level flight.
• The maneuver is considered complete once a safe
speed is achieved and the airplane stabilized.
• Satisfactory crew coordination must be
demonstrated.
COMMON PILOT ERRORS • Fails to disengage the autopilot and autothrottle.
• Fails to reduce thrust sufficiently, if necessary, to
obtain nose-down pitch.
• Reduces thrust excessively.
• Fails to use sufficient elevator authority.
• Fails to use stabilizer trim when necessary.
COMMON INSTRUCTOR • Fails to notice improper control inputs.
ERRORS • If the FSTD training envelope was exceeded, fails
to advise the pilot to prevent negative training.
Page 2
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
SCENARIO 2: LOSS OF RELIABLE AIRSPEED
INSTRUCTOR ROLE Implement scenarios that result in erroneous airspeed
indications.
OBJECTIVE The pilot will recognize the airspeed discrepancy,
determine airspeed data is erroneous, and apply the
appropriate non-normal procedure while maintaining
airplane control using pitch and power targets.
EMPHASIS AREAS • Recognition.
• Crew coordination.
• AOA management including available AOA
indications.
• Maintain awareness of and manage flightpath and
energy.
• Aural and visual warnings (environment and
airplane cueing).
• Completion of the appropriate non-normal
checklist.
• Surprise and startle.
• Manual flying skills.
• Effects of altitude on control inputs.
FSTD SETUP The scenario will be conducted at or near the maximum
CONSIDERATIONS operating altitude in instrument meteorological conditions
(IMC). Use of flight simulation training device (FSTD)
capabilities to induce erroneous airspeed indications may
include:
• Full or partial pitot/static blockage or icing.
• Air data computer failures.
SCENARIO ELEMENTS • During cruise, one or two airspeed indicators will
malfunction.
• The pilot recognizing the erroneous airspeed data
indication will verbally announce the discrepancy.
• The pilot flying will maintain control of the
airplane and call for the appropriate non-normal
checklist.
• At the conclusion of the scenario, the instructor
will discuss available airplane AOA indications.
COMPLETION STANDARDS • The pilot flying will manage pitch and power to
avoid a stall.
• Satisfactory crew coordination must be
demonstrated.
• Correctly identifies the erroneous airspeed data.
• Completes the appropriate non-normal checklist.
Page 3
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
SCENARIO 2: LOSS OF RELIABLE AIRSPEED
• Verifies the autopilot and autothrottle/autothrust
are disconnected.
• The pilot monitoring provides the pilot flying with
meaningful input (e.g., attitude and altitude
deviations and trends).
COMMON PILOT ERRORS • The importance of pitch control and AOA is not
recognized.
• Use of large thrust changes.
• Failure to complete the appropriate non-normal
checklist.
• Overcontrolling the airplane, especially pitch.
COMMON INSTRUCTOR • Fails to notice improper control inputs.
ERRORS • If the validated FSTD envelope was exceeded, fails
to advise the pilot and stop the scenario to prevent
negative training.
Page 4
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
SCENARIO 3: SUB-THRESHOLD ROLL
INSTRUCTOR ROLE Implement scenarios that cause an imperceptibly slow roll
rate (less than 3° per second) that result in an unexpected
high bank angle.
OBJECTIVE The pilot will recognize the high bank angle and
immediately perform the upset recovery procedure.
EMPHASIS AREAS • Recognition and recovery.
• Crew coordination.
• AOA management.
• Out-of-trim control forces at autopilot disconnect
(if engaged).
• Aural and visual warnings (environment and
airplane cueing).
• Surprise and startle.
• Effects of multiple levels of automation.
• Effects of altitude on recovery.
• Situational awareness while returning to desired
flightpath after the upset recovery, including such
items as heading, terrain, altitude, other aircraft,
and flight deck automation.
FSTD SETUP The scenario will be conducted at an altitude that will
CONSIDERATIONS allow for a recovery. Crew distractions may be used
(e.g., minor malfunctions, air traffic control (ATC)
instructions, weather). Use of FSTD capabilities to induce
a slow, imperceptible roll rate (less than 3° per second)
may include:
• Attitude changes.
• Thrust asymmetry.
• System malfunctions (e.g., surreptitious disabling
of automation).
• Dynamic upsets should not be implemented in a
manner that disables or unrealistically reduces
flight control effectiveness for the purpose of
generating or attaining an upset condition.
SCENARIO ELEMENTS • The instructor will introduce a situation which
causes the airplane to enter an imperceptible roll
resulting in an unexpected bank angle greater than
30°.
• Either pilot will notice and announce the excessive
bank.
• The pilot flying will demonstrate the proper
recovery procedure.
• Disengage the autopilot and autothrottle.
Page 5
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
SCENARIO 3: SUB-THRESHOLD ROLL
• If a nose-high or nose-low condition exists, identify
the situation and apply the correct recovery.
• Maintain awareness of energy management and
airplane roll rate.
• Unload (reduce AOA) as necessary and roll to
wings level as the nose approaches the horizon.
Recover to a slightly nose-low attitude. Check
airspeed and adjust thrust and pitch as necessary.
• When recovery is assured, adjust the pitch attitude
to return to the intended flightpath.
COMPLETION STANDARDS • Rolls in the shortest direction to wings level.
• Returns the airplane to the assigned flightpath.
• Satisfactory crew coordination must be
demonstrated.
COMMON PILOT ERRORS • Recovery is initiated by rolling in the wrong
direction, increasing the bank.
• Losing situational awareness and failing to return
to assigned flightpath or follow ATC instructions
after recovery.
• Pilot(s) slow to recognize or announce the
excessive bank.
• Executes improper recovery procedure.
• Failure to disengage the autopilot and/or
autothrottle/autothrust.
• Slow to reduce angle of attack (unload).
• Failure to maintain awareness of energy
management.
COMMON INSTRUCTOR • Fails to notice improper control inputs.
ERRORS • If the FSTD training envelope was exceeded, fails
to advise the pilot and stop the scenario to prevent
negative training.
Page 6
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
MANEUVER 1: MANUALLY CONTROLLED SLOW FLIGHT
OBJECTIVE Recognize the low energy or high drag configuration and
the slow response to flight control and thrust inputs to
enhance the pilot’s knowledge of the low-speed handling
qualities prior to stall training.
EMPHASIS AREAS Manual flying skills
FSTD SETUP • Select ceiling and visibility unlimited.
CONSIDERATIONS • The maneuver will be conducted in the following
two scenarios:
Low altitude beginning in a clean
o
configuration, and then slowing while
configuring the airplane for landing. This
maneuver will be conducted at maximum
landing gross weight.
High altitude in a clean configuration (e.g., near
o
the service ceiling), near maximum gross
weight while maintaining minimum speed for
the configuration.
• Target speeds should be below the minimum drag
speed for the various configurations. The minimum
speed must avoid stick shaker. Ideally a single
speed can be selected for use throughout the
maneuver that will permit judicious maneuvering
without stick shaker. Encountering stick shaker
without executing a stall recovery could lead to
negative training.
SCENARIO ELEMENTS • While maintaining altitude, slowly establish the
pitch attitude (using trim or elevator or stabilizer),
bank angle, and power setting that will allow a
controlled speed reduction to establish the desired
target airspeed.
• Maneuver in straight and level flight to stabilize
speed and trim.
• Turn left and right, and change direction of turn, to
observe changing handling characteristics.
• Turns through 90º left and right at bank angles
appropriate to speed and configuration.
• Climb and descend at 500 feet per minute (fpm)
while in a turn.
Page 7
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 2
MANEUVER 1: MANUALLY CONTROLLED SLOW FLIGHT
COMPLETION STANDARDS • Recover to appropriate airspeed for the
configuration and establish the appropriate altitude
and heading.
• Recovery is complete when straight and level
unaccelerated flight is achieved.
COMMON PILOT ERRORS • Inadequate back-elevator pressure as power is
reduced, resulting in altitude loss.
• Excessive back-elevator pressure as power is
reduced, resulting in a climb, followed by a rapid
reduction in airspeed and “mushing.”
• Inadequate compensation for adverse yaw during
turns.
• Fixation on the airspeed indicator.
• Failure to anticipate changes in lift as flaps are
extended or retracted.
• Inadequate power management.
• Inability to adequately divide attention between
airplane control and orientation.
Page 8
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
Appendix 3
APPENDIX 3. FLIGHT SIMULATION TRAINING DEVICE (FSTD)
CONSIDERATIONS
1. SUMMARY OF FSTD CAPABILITIES.
a. FSTDs are a key element of a pilot training program because they are a cost-effective and
safe alternative to performing training in the actual airplane while providing the capability to
train certain tasks which cannot be easily trained in the actual airplane. Abnormal and emergency
procedures that could not be trained in the actual airplane can be trained in an FSTD, in a
risk-free environment, with an adequate level of fidelity when operated within its training limits.
b. An FSTD is a synthetic environment, which cannot fully replicate the exact experience of
an aircraft; however, there is reason to be confident that the appropriately qualified FSTD has
satisfactory fidelity for training normal, abnormal, and emergency procedures. In consideration
of the normal limitations of FSTDs (such as aerodynamic validation, and motion cueing
limitations), there is concern that practicing upset recovery techniques could include inadvertent
excursions beyond its intended training envelope. This concern may be overcome if instructors
have a better understanding of the FSTD limitations and additional instructor tools, which is why
this advisory circular (AC) puts special emphasis on instructor training and qualification.
2. FSTD EVALUATION REQUIREMENTS.
a. Since the original publication of this AC, FSTD evaluation and qualification
requirements have been codified in Title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR)
part 60,13 which requires that all FSTDs being used for Upset Prevention and Recovery (UPRT)
maneuvers must be specifically evaluated and qualified for such maneuvers. After
March 12, 2019, any FSTD being used to conduct UPRT must be qualified as described in
part 60, FSTD Directive 2.
b. The National Simulator Program (NSP) currently maintains guidance for the evaluation
of FSTDs for use in UPRT in FSTD Qualification Guidance Bulletin 11-05, FSTD Evaluation
and Qualification for Upset Prevention and Recovery Training (UPRT) Tasks. NSP
guidance bulletins may be found on the FAA’s public website at https://www.faa.gov/about/initi
atives/nsp/.
3. INSTRUCTOR TOOLS FOR UPRT. To support UPRT in an FSTD, additional tools and
capabilities should be made available to the instructor for briefing, training, and debriefing
UPRT maneuvers. This may include video and audio capability, preprogramed
distractors/initiators, as well as feedback tools to determine if the recovery maneuver has
exceeded FSTD limits or airplane operational limits.
a. A set of simple instructor controls which can aid the instructor in developing distractors.
The distraction should be a nonstandard event such that the crew thought process and the actions
13 Refer to the Flight Simulation Training Device Qualification Standards for Extended Envelope and Adverse
Weather Event Training Tasks final rule (81 FR 18177, March 30, 2016).
Page 1
1/4/17 AC 120-111 CHG 1
Appendix 3
they take are not based on the use of the checklist. These may be weather related, traffic, air
traffic control (ATC), or other such inputs which may create a distraction.
b. A dynamic set of upsets, which may be a result of internal or external factors. The
intentional degradation of FSTD functionality (such as degrading flight control effectiveness) to
drive an airplane upset is generally not acceptable unless used purely as a tool for repositioning
the FSTD with the pilot out of the loop. Aircraft system malfunctions or other malfunctions may
be utilized to stimulate an aircraft upset, however the effects of these malfunctions must be
representative of the aircraft and, where possible, supported by data.
• A set of upset initiation features (e.g., autothrottle/autothrust disconnection not
commanded by the pilot) designed to assess the prevention of an upset event by the
crew. The objective of this upset feature is to generate a condition that, if the crew
does not recognize it and take timely corrective action, it will continue to develop and
result in an upset.
• A set of upset initiation features (e.g., sub-threshold roll) designed to lead the crew to
initiate recognition measures. The objective of this upset feature is to generate a
developing upset condition so that crew action will prevent a fully developed upset
condition.
• A set of upset initiation features (e.g., a full pitch up using external stimuli) designed
specifically to progress in severity so that the crew has to initiate recovery measures.
The objective of this upset feature is to generate a developed upset condition so that
the crew has to initiate appropriate recovery action to prevent further loss of control.
c. Instructor feedback tools should be provided which indicate if airplane operating limits
are exceeded, the parameters monitored may include the following:
• Airspeed limitations,
• Maximum operating speed,
• Maneuvering speed,
• Flap extended speed,
• Minimum control speed,
• Landing gear speeds,
• Rough air speed,
• Altitude limitations,
• Powerplant limitations, and
• Maneuvering flight load factors including simultaneous roll and pitch.
d. The instructor should be provided with an indication of when the FSTD has exceeded the
validation limits of its aerodynamic model. The model limits may be based upon an angle of
attack and sideslip range as defined by the FSTD’s aerodynamic model provider. Refer to
Appendix 3-D, Flight Simulator Information, of the Airplane Upset Recovery Training Aid
(AURTA) Revision 2 and NSP Guidance Bulletin 11-05 for additional information.
Page 2
4/14/15 AC 120-111
Appendix 3
e. The instructor should be provided with an indication of when an airplane limit is:
• Approached (cautionary warning—amber) or reasonable margins as appropriate can
be used; the intent is to give the instructor an initial indication that the airplane is
operating close to a limit.
• Exceeded (exceedance warning—red). The simulation should not automatically
freeze unless the limit is exceeded by a predefined margin that voids the training or
can cause an unsafe condition on the FSTD.
f. The dividing line between a valid and invalid training envelope may be grey instead of
being represented by a clear line on an instructor’s display. While an instructor may adopt a
conservative approach by repeating a maneuver that caused the FSTD to exceed its training
envelope slightly, it is more important for both the instructor and trainee to recognize that the
objective is not to convey the precise aircraft response but to reinforce the proper recovery
technique. The actual response of the aircraft may vary whether inside or outside the intended
training envelope. Ultimately, sound judgment is required on the part of the instructor, which can
best be applied through an adequate understanding of an FSTD’s limitations.
4. FSTD MOTION LIMITATIONS. Pilot control inputs are often highly influenced by load
factor, or g. Unfortunately, a pilot in a typical FSTD feels less than 10 percent of the actual
airplane g. Both the instructor and trainee need to be aware of this difference between flight and
simulation. Upset recoveries in an FSTD at high altitudes can be prone to oscillations that go
unnoticed if the full suite of available pilot and instructor displays are not used. As such, it is
important for the instructor to be alert for such problematic recoveries, convey the errors
appropriately to the trainee if they occur, and repeat the maneuvers until the trainee is proficient.
Page 3 (and 4)
Advisory Circular Feedback Form
If you find an error in this AC, have recommendations for improving it, or have suggestions for
new items/subjects to be added, you may let us know by contacting the Air Transportation
Division at 9-AFS-200-Correspondence@faa.gov or the Flight Standards Directives
Management Officer at 9-AWA-AFB-120-Directives@faa.gov.
Subject: AC 120-111 CHG 1, Upset Prevention and Recovery Training
Date: _____________________
Please check all appropriate line items:
An error (procedural or typographical) has been noted in paragraph ____________
on page _______.
Recommend paragraph _____________ on page __________ be changed as follows:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
In a future change to this AC, please cover the following subject:
(Briefly describe what you want added.)
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
Other comments:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
I would like to discuss the above. Please contact me.
Submitted by: Date: ______________________
