0 Advisory
U.S. Department Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: ESTABLISHING AND Date: 01/10/11 AC No: 120-104
IMPLEMENTING LIMIT OF VALIDITY TO Initiated By: ANM-100
PREVENT WIDESPREAD FATIGUE and AFS-300
DAMAGE
1. PURPOSE. This advisory circular (AC) offers guidance on compliance with Title 14 Code
of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) 26.21, 26.23, 121.1115, and 129.115. It tells design approval
holders of transport category airplanes how to establish a limit of validity of the engineering data
that supports the structural maintenance program (hereafter referred to as LOV) for those
airplanes. It also tells design approval holders how to address maintenance actions that have
been determined necessary to support an LOV. It tells operators of those airplanes how to
incorporate the LOV into their Continued Airworthiness Maintenance Programs. Finally, this
AC provides guidance to anyone wishing to extend an LOV. Guidance for establishing an LOV
for airplanes whose type certificate was applied for after January 14, 2011, is contained in AC
25.571-1D. Guidance for extending an LOV approved under § 25.571, § 26.21, or § 26.23 can
be found here. The actions described in this AC are meant to prevent widespread fatigue damage
(WFD) in the transport airplane fleet up to the LOV.
2. APPLICABILITY.
a. The regulatory basis for this AC is defined in Appendix 1. This guidance is for design
approval holders—holders of type certificates, supplemental type certificates, and amended
type certificates, as defined in Appendix 2—as well as applicants for those certificates. It is
also intended for airplane manufacturers, operators, foreign civil aviation authorities, and
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) transport category airplane type certification
engineers and their designees, as well as FAA Flight Standards inspectors.
b. This guidance applies to metallic structure on:
(1) Turbine-powered transport category airplanes, existing at the effective date of the
rule (January 14, 2011), that are operated under part 121 or 129 and have a type
certificate issued after January 1, 1958, and a maximum takeoff gross weight greater
than 75,000 pounds as approved by the original type certificate or an amended or
supplemental type certificate.
01/10/11 AC 120-104
(2) Transport category airplanes that have had the maximum takeoff gross weight
reduced from greater than 75,000 pounds to 75,000 pounds or less if the application for
that change was made after January 14, 2011.
(3) All transport category airplanes with a current LOV, when that LOV is being
extended. This would include LOVs approved under § 25.571, 26.21, or 26.23.
c. Like all AC material, this AC is not, in itself, mandatory, and does not constitute a
regulation. It describes an acceptable means, but not the only means, for showing
compliance with the applicable regulations. The FAA will consider other means of showing
compliance that an applicant may elect to present. We derived these guidelines from
extensive FAA and industry experience in showing compliance with the relevant
regulations. On the other hand, if we become aware of circumstances that convince us that
following this AC would not result in compliance with the applicable regulations, we will
not be bound by the terms of this AC. We may require additional substantiation or design
changes as a basis for finding compliance.
d. This material does not change, create any additional, authorize changes in, or permit
deviations from, regulatory requirements. The regulatory basis for this AC is contained in
Appendix 1.
e. The term “must” in this AC is used only in the sense of ensuring applicability of this
particular means of compliance when the acceptable means of compliance described herein
is used.
3. WHY DO YOU NEED AN LOV? If you properly maintain an airplane, theoretically you
could operate it indefinitely. But structural maintenance tasks for an airplane are not constant
with time. Tasks are typically added to the maintenance program as the airplane ages. It is
reasonable to expect, then, that the current structural maintenance tasks may not, at some future
point, be sufficient for continued operation. Maintenance tasks for a particular airplane can only
be determined based on what is known about that airplane model at any given time—from
analyses, tests, service experience, and teardown inspections. To ensure that an airplane is free
from WFD up to this point, a design approval holder would evaluate WFD-susceptible structure
and establish an LOV.
4. DOCUMENT ORGANIZATION. This AC has four chapters. Chapter 1 provides an overview
for establishing an LOV. Chapter 2 addresses compliance information for design approval
holders. Chapter 3 addresses extended LOV. Chapter 4 gives compliance information for
operators. Finally, the appendices contain useful information such as related regulations and
documents (Appendix 1), definitions (Appendix 2), acronyms (Appendix 3), background to the
rule (Appendix 4), examples of structure susceptible to WFD (Appendix 5), details of a WFD
ii
01/10/11 AC 120-104
evaluation (Appendix 6), an example of how to establish an LOV (Appendix 7), and a sample
compliance plan (Appendix 8).
Dorenda D. Baker John M. Allen
Director, Aircraft Certification Service Director, Flight Standards Service
iii
01/10/11 AC 120-104
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. PURP OSE I
2. APPLICABILITY I
3. WHY DO YOU NEED AN LOV? II
4. DOCU MENT ORGAN IZATION II
CHAPTER 1—OVERVIEW OF THE PROCESS FOR ESTABLISHING A LIMIT OF VALIDITY 3
100. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHAPTER 1 3
101. WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAG.E 3
102. LIMIT OF VALIDITY 3
103. CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS FOR AGING AIRPLANES 4
104. MAINTENANCE ACTIONS AND AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES 4
105. DESIGN APPROVAL HOLDER AND OPERATOR TASKS 5
CHAPTER 2—§ 26.21 COMPLIANCE INFORMATION FOR DESIGN APPROVAL HOLDERS 6
200. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHAPTER 2 6
201. COMPLIANCE PLAN 6
202. RECOMMENDED ADDITIONAL COMPLIANCE PLAN ITEMS 7
203. AIRPLANE STRUCTURAL CONFIGURATION 8
204. ESTABLISHING AN LOV 8
205. MAINTENANCE ACTIONS AND SERVICE INFORMATION 11
206. REQIREMENT FOR AIRWORTHINESS LIMITATIONS SECTION 12
207. SUPPORTING DATA 12
208. FAA OVERSIGHT OFFICE APPROVAL 13
209. MAKING LOV DATA AVAILABLE 13
210. DESIGN APPROVAL HOLDER REPORTING 13
CHAPTER 3—§ 26.23 EXTENDED LOVS 15
300. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHAPTER 3 15
301. APPLICATION FOR EXTENDED LOV 15
302. AIRPLANE STRUCTURAL CONFIGURATION FOR AN EXTENDED LOV 16
303. ESTABLISHING AN EXTENDED LOV AND SUPPORTING DATA 16
304. AIRWORTHINESS LIMITATIONS SECTION 16
305. FAA APPROVALS FOR EXTENDED LOVS 16
CHAPTER 4—COMPLIANCE INFORMATION FOR OPERATORS 17
400. GENERAL INFORMATION FOR OPERATORS 17
401. AIRWORTHINESS LIMITATIONS SECTION 17
402. AIRPLANES WITHOUT LOVS 18
403. ADDING AN AIRPLANE TO AN OPERATOR'S FLEET AFTER THE COMPLIANCE DATE HAS PASSED 18
404. EXTENDED LOVS 18
405. PMI APPROVAL 19
406. OPERATOR REPORTING 19
APPENDIX 1—RELATED REGULATIONS AND DOCUMENTS
APPENDIX 2—DEFINITIONS
APPENDIX 3—ACRONYMS USED IN THIS AC
APPENDIX 4—BACKGROUND
APPENDIX 5—EXAMPLES OF STRUCTURE SUSCEPTIBLE TO WFD
1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
APPENDIX 6—WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE EVALUATION
APPENDIX 7—EXAMPLE OF HOW TO ESTABLISH AN LOV
APPENDIX 8—SAMPLE COMPLIANCE PLAN
2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
CHAPTER 1—OVERVIEW OF THE PROCESS FOR ESTABLISHING A
LIMIT OF VALIDITY
100. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHAPTER 1. This chapter gives an overview of
widespread fatigue damage and the various aspects of establishing a limit of validity of the
engineering data that supports the structural maintenance program (LOV). It explains the
relationship of the widespread fatigue damage rule (Amendment Nos. 25-132, 26-5, 121-351,
and 129-48) to other programs that have been established to address structural integrity of
airplanes as they age. It also includes design approval holder and operator tasks and
deliverables.
101. WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE. Structural fatigue damage is progressive. It
begins as minute cracks, and those cracks grow under the action of repeated stresses. This can
happen because of normal operational conditions and design attributes or because of isolated
situations or incidents, such as material defects, poor fabrication quality, or corrosion pits, dings,
or scratches. Fatigue damage can occur locally, in small areas or structural design details, or
globally. Global fatigue damage is general degradation of large areas of structure with similar
structural details and stress levels. Global damage may occur in a large structural element such
as a single rivet line of a lap splice joining two large skin panels (multiple site damage). Or it
may be found in multiple elements, such as adjacent frames or stringers (multiple element
damage). Multiple site damage and multiple element damage cracks are typically too small
initially to be reliably detected with normal inspection methods. Without intervention, these
cracks will grow, and eventually compromise the structural integrity of the airplane, in a
condition known as widespread fatigue damage. Widespread fatigue damage, hereafter referred
to as WFD, is increasingly likely as the airplane ages, and is certain if the airplane is operated
long enough without any intervention.
102. LIMIT OF VALIDITY. The LOV is the period of time (in flight cycles, flight hours, or
both), up to which it has been demonstrated that WFD is unlikely to occur in an airplane’s
structure by virtue of its inherent design characteristics and any required maintenance actions.
An airplane may not operate beyond the LOV, unless an extended LOV is approved. To support
establishment of the LOV, the design approval holder must demonstrate by test evidence and
analysis at a minimum and, if available, service experience or service experience and teardown
inspection results of high-time airplanes, that WFD will not occur in that airplane up to the LOV.
An LOV applies to an airplane structural configuration common to a fleet, as described in
§ 26.21. Any reference in this AC to the LOV for an airplane refers to the LOV for all the
airplanes with that structural configuration. When establishing an LOV under § 26.21, or an
extended LOV under § 26.23, you are not required to evaluate repairs and design changes for
WFD, except for modifications and replacements mandated by airworthiness directives.
3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
For airplanes with an LOV, the Changed Product Rule, 14 CFR 21.101, would require applicants
for significant design changes to include the latest amendment of § 25.571 in the design change
certification basis. Guidance for evaluating repairs and design changes according to the latest
requirements of § 25.571 is included in AC 25.571-1D.
103. CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS FOR AGING AIRPLANES. The requirement to
establish an LOV is the last element of a series of initiatives meant to ensure the continued
airworthiness of aging airplane structure. The following programs for existing airplanes, or their
equivalent for new airplanes, have already been established—
 The Supplemental Structural Inspection Program. This AD-mandated program made
damage-tolerance-based inspections on certain airplane models a requirement.
 The Mandatory Modification Program. This AD-mandated program was a review of
service bulletins in order to decide whether inspections are sufficient or whether
terminating actions should be made mandatory.
 The Repair Assessment Program. This is an operational rule that mandated
evaluations of certain repairs to determine whether inspections or terminating actions
are necessary.
 The Corrosion Prevention and Control Program. This AD-mandated program made
inspections for corrosion on certain airplane models a requirement.
 The Aging Airplane Safety Rule (which addresses repairs, alterations, and
modifications). This is an operational rule that mandates development of damage­
tolerance-based inspections for fatigue critical structure.
For further guidance on the elements involved in ensuring continuing structural integrity for
airplanes see AC 91-56B and AC 120-93.
104. MAINTENANCE ACTIONS AND AIRWORTHINESS DIRECTIVES. If you are a
design approval holder complying with § 26.21, you are not required to identify and develop
maintenance actions if you can show that such actions are not necessary to prevent WFD before
the airplane reaches the LOV. If you establish an LOV that does rely on maintenance actions,
you must identify them. Service information, which is typically issued in service bulletins,
includes a description of the maintenance actions and the procedures for accomplishing them.
Some of the maintenance actions required for the LOV may have already been issued in a service
bulletin and mandated by airworthiness directive. For the rest, airworthiness directives will need
to be issued.
4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
105. DESIGN APPROVAL HOLDER AND OPERATOR TASKS. The following table
displays an overview of the tasks necessary for establishing an LOV and incorporating it into the
maintenance program. These tasks are further developed in Chapter 2 of this AC. They are
necessary for establishing a point in time up to which affected airplanes will remain free of
WFD. These design approval tasks will support the operator tasks necessary for compliance
with §§ 121.1115 and 129.115.
Table 1
Required Tasks for Design Approval Holders and Operators
Design Approval Holders Operators
Develop and submit compliance plan [§ 26.21(d)] Obtain approved revised ALS or new ALS
containing the LOV from DAH [§ 121.1115(b) or
§ 129.115(b)] or use the default LOV from Table 1
of § 121.1115(f) or § 129.115(f)
Identify the airplane structural configuration for Submit revised maintenance program with revised
affected airplane model/models [§ 26.21(b)(1)] or new ALS incorporating the LOV to the PMI
[§ 121.1115(e) or § 129.115(e)]
Establish the LOV and demonstrate that WFD will Stop operating the airplane if the LOV is not
not occur in the airplane up to the LOV incorporated by compliance date. [§ 121.1115(b) or
[§ 26.21(b)(1)] § 129.115(b)]
Submit list of any maintenance actions needed to Stop operating the airplane if the airplane reaches
support the LOV if service information has been the LOV. [§ 121.1115(d) or § 129.115(d)]
issued but not mandated by AD [§ 26.21(b)(2)(i)]
Submit a list of any needed maintenance actions
for which service information has not been issued,
and a binding schedule for when it will be available
[§ 26.21(b)(2)(ii)]
Create an ALS of the ICA if one does not exist
[§ 26.21(b)(3)]
Incorporate the LOV into the ALS and submit it
(and supporting data) [§ 26.21(b)(4)]
AD—Airworthiness Directive
ALS—Airworthiness Limitations section
DAH—Design Approval Holder
ICA—Instructions for Continued Airworthiness
PMI—Principal Maintenance Inspector
5
01/10/11 AC 120-104
CHAPTER 2—§ 26.21 COMPLIANCE INFORMATION FOR DESIGN
APPROVAL HOLDERS
200. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHAPTER 2. Table 1, in the previous chapter,
listed required tasks for design approval holders and operators. This chapter gives details for the
design approval holder tasks. (Although this chapter uses the term “design approval holder,”
some applicants for design approvals must complete the same tasks.) If you are a design
approval holder who must comply with § 26.21, this chapter tells you how to establish an LOV
for affected existing airplanes. It tells you how to establish an LOV for those airplanes with a
type certificate, amended type certificate, or supplemental type certificate that is pending
approval as of the effective date of § 26.21 or those airplanes with an amended type certificate or
supplemental type certificate that will be approved in the future. It explains the role of
maintenance actions in complying with these requirements and how they are identified,
approved, and implemented. This chapter also tells you how to create or revise the
Airworthiness Limitations section of the Instructions for Continued Airworthiness.
201. COMPLIANCE PLAN. One requirement of § 26.21 is that affected persons provide
compliance plans to the FAA Oversight Office1 (as defined in § 26.3) for review and approval.
The compliance plan serves to give the aircraft certification office or Transport Airplane
Directorate engineer a clear idea of what the design approval holder is going to do to comply
with the WFD rule, including processes and dates. The compliance plan is meant to ensure that
the design approval holder and the FAA have a common understanding and agreement about
what is necessary to achieve compliance. Specific details of the acceptable contents of a
compliance plan, and procedures for submission to the FAA, are described in AC 26-1, “Part 26,
Continued Airworthiness and Safety Improvements.” Compliance plans must contain elements
that describe compliance status and any proposed differences in means of compliance from those
described in this AC. Any deviation from the means of compliance described in this AC may
require an issue paper. Integral to the compliance plan will be the inclusion of procedures to
allow the FAA to monitor progress toward compliance. A compliance plan must include:
a. A project schedule identifying all major milestones for meeting the compliance dates.
This schedule should include, but is not limited to—
(1) A schedule for submission of an LOV.
(2) Establishment of a structures task group2 schedule (if applicable).
1 The FAA Oversight Office is the aircraft certification office or office of the Transport Airplane Directorate with
oversight responsibility for the relevant type certificate, supplemental type certificate, or manufacturer, as
determined by the Administrator.
2 A structures task group is a group formed of manufacturers and operators to discuss maintenance procedures for
specific models.
6
01/10/11 AC 120-104
b. A proposed means of compliance with the requirements, such as methods and
procedures for—
(1) Identifying the airplane structural configuration to be evaluated.
(2) Identifying WFD-susceptible structure. (See Appendix 5 for further guidance.)
(3) Identifying the source of engineering data that will be used to perform the required
evaluations.
(4) Evaluating structure for WFD. (See Appendix 6 for further guidance.)
(5) Establishing an LOV. (See Appendix 7 for further guidance.)
(6) Identifying and developing maintenance actions, if any.
c. A plan for submitting a draft of all required compliance items for review by the FAA
Oversight Office not less than 60 days before the applicable compliance date.
d. Plans for distribution of the approved LOV.
If you are the design approval holder, the process for completing all of the above will require
ongoing communication with personnel from the FAA Oversight Office. You have the option of
developing a single LOV to apply to all the models on the type certificate data sheet, a separate
LOV for each model, or an LOV for different groups of airplanes within the type certificate. If
you have not yet decided on the airplane model grouping at the time the compliance plan is
submitted, or if you have not yet identified WFD-susceptible structures, we would expect you to
communicate that information as soon as possible. The compliance plan should include a
schedule for when that information will be made available. We also expect that the compliance
plan would specify milestone dates for transmitting any information not yet known. Appendix 8
of this AC includes a sample compliance plan.
202. RECOMMENDED ADDITIONAL COMPLIANCE PLAN ITEMS. In addition to the
required elements, we recommend you include the following elements in your compliance plan:
a. A Proposed Communication and Coordination Plan. This plan should identify
the design approval holder personnel who will be the contacts for the FAA Oversight
Office. Conversely, although not part of the communication and coordination plan, the
FAA Oversight Office should make sure the design approval holder knows who to contact
within the FAA. The plan should also include the frequency of and mechanism for status
updates and the sharing of other information.
b. A Proposed Delegation Plan. If a design approval holder asks for delegated
authority for app66roving compliance with these regulations on behalf of the FAA, then that
7
01/10/11 AC 120-104
delegation plan must first be approved by the FAA. Except for the WFD evaluation
methodology, we may delegate to our designees the review and approval of supporting data
(see paragraph 207 of this AC) used for the establishment of an LOV or any maintenance
actions. However, just as we do not delegate approval of certification plans, we will not
delegate review and approval of this rule’s compliance plan, binding schedule, and LOV to
designees.
203. AIRPLANE STRUCTURAL CONFIGURATION. You must identify the airplane
structural configuration for each airplane model you are evaluating for WFD. Under
§ 26.21(c)(3) or (4), if you amend the type certificate in the future, this requirement would also
apply to any configuration change. For existing and pending airplanes, the airplane structural
configuration must consist of all model variations and derivatives approved under the type
certificate, and include any structural modifications or replacements mandated by AD as of
January 14, 2011. You may then develop a single LOV to be applied to all those model
variations and derivatives collectively, or you may develop separate LOVs for each model
variation and derivative. Similarly, if a new model is added to the type certificate, the
configuration of that new model must be identified and evaluated for WFD as well. The result of
that evaluation may be that the LOV for the originally certificated model can also be applied to
the new one. Alternatively, the WFD evaluation may result in a new LOV being established
because the configuration of the new model is different enough from the originally type-
certificated model that the WFD behavior will be different as well.
204. ESTABLISHING AN LOV. The process for establishing an LOV involves four steps—
(a) Identifying a “candidate LOV.”
(b) Identifying WFD-susceptible structure.
(c) Performing a WFD evaluation of all susceptible structure.
(d) Finalizing the LOV.
Appendix 7 provides an example of how to establish an LOV using the process summarized
below.
a. Step 1—Candidate LOV. An LOV is applicable to an airplane model with a defined
structural configuration. The LOV will be dependent on the fatigue knowledge available for
the airplane structural configuration at the time the LOV is established. It may also depend
on maintenance actions considered necessary to preclude WFD in susceptible areas. There
is no single “valid” LOV. For existing younger airplane models with many years of
operation remaining between the time on the high-time airplane of that model and its design
service goal, the LOV may be approximately equal to the design service goal with few, if
any, required maintenance actions. For airplane models with high-time airplanes
8
01/10/11 AC 120-104
approaching or exceeding the design service goal, the LOV may be significantly greater
than the design service goal and dependent on a large number of maintenance actions.
Conceptually, any LOV can be valid as long as it is demonstrated that the airplane model
will be free from WFD up to the LOV based on the airplane’s inherent fatigue
characteristics and any required maintenance actions. An established LOV can always be
extended in accordance with § 26.23 as discussed in Chapter 3.
Early in the WFD evaluation process, design approval holders may have an LOV in mind as
a likely candidate for compliance with § 26.21. This “candidate LOV” will be based on
high-level technical considerations, such as the age and service experience of the fleet, and
results of previously accomplished fatigue tests and analyses. It may also be based on
economic considerations. Subsequently, as susceptible areas are evaluated in detail, the
LOV may be adjusted up or down based on the impact of the proposed maintenance actions
b. Step 2—Identification of WFD-Susceptible Structure. If you are developing an
LOV, you must identify the structure that is susceptible to WFD. Appendix 5 provides
examples and illustrations of structure where multiple site damage or multiple element
damage has been documented. This list is not meant to be inclusive of all structure that
might be susceptible on any given airplane model, and it should only be used for general
guidance. It should not be used to exclude any particular structure. When developing the
list of structure susceptible to WFD you should:
(1) Consider the list of fatigue-critical baseline structures identified under § 26.43, the
Damage Tolerance Data for Repairs and Alterations rule.
(2) Develop rationale for including and excluding structure. This should be part of
your compliance data.
(3) Establish criteria that could be used for identifying what structure is susceptible to
WFD based on the definitions of multiple site damage, multiple element damage, and
WFD. For example, structural details and elements that are repeated over large areas
and operate at the same stress levels are obvious candidates. This should be part of your
compliance data.
c. Step 3—WFD Evaluation of Susceptible Structure. Each susceptible structure
must be evaluated to some degree. For some structures, you may have data such as fatigue
tests, analysis, and service experience that demonstrates that WFD will not occur before an
airplane reaches its LOV. In that case, you would not have to go through the process of
quantifying the point in time when, without intervention, 50% of the fleet is expected to
have developed WFD. That point in time is referred to as the “WFD average behavior” for
that structure. For other structures, you will have to do an evaluation. Figure 2 shows the
evaluation process. Engineering data from service experience or laboratory tests or both
must be available to support the evaluation. Based on the data available, a time period is
determined for WFD and is then compared to the candidate LOV. It may be
(average behavior)
9
01/10/11 AC 120-104
found that maintenance actions are needed before the airplane reaches the candidate LOV to
preclude WFD in that airplane. When that is the case, additional work may be required to—
 Assess multiple site damage/multiple element damage inspection reliability and
practicality (e.g., detectable size of cracks and probability of detection).
 Determine when inspections should start (this is the inspection start point—ISP).
 Determine inspection intervals.
 Determine when modifications or replacements should occur (this is the structural
modification point—SMP).
This process will determine the maintenance actions necessary for the airplane to reach the
LOV. The additional work required to complete the service information is discussed in
paragraph 205. The WFD evaluation process is discussed in detail in Appendix 6.
Figure 1
WFD Evaluation for Each Susceptible Structure
Service
Engineering Data Laboratory
Experience
Tests
Analyses
c-----
WFD Behavior
--==j--
YYeess
Candidate Maintenance Actions?
SMP
LOV
and/or ISP
NNoo
Done
SMP – Structural Modification Point
ISP – Inspection Start Point
d. Step 4—Finalize LOV. Once all susceptible structures have been evaluated, the final
step is to determine where to establish the LOV that you will propose for compliance.
Based on the WFD evaluation under Step 3, you may decide to establish the final LOV by
increasing or decreasing the candidate LOV identified in Step 1. This may result in fewer
10
01/10/11 AC 120-104
maintenance actions, or more of them. See Appendix 7 for an example of establishing an
LOV with the process described in this chapter. In addition to the technical considerations,
the LOV may be based on several other factors, including—
 Fleet demographics.
 Maintenance considerations.
 Operator input.
 Economics.
205. MAINTENANCE ACTIONS AND SERVICE INFORMATION. Based on the
evaluation described above, the design approval holder will establish an LOV. The LOV may
depend on maintenance actions and, if so, you must identify them. Maintenance actions could be
inspections, modifications, or replacements.
a. For each required inspection, you should include—
 The structure to be inspected.
 The method of inspection.
 The inspection start point (the point in time at which to begin inspections).
 The repeat interval.
b. For required modifications or replacements, you should include—
 The structure to be modified or replaced.
 The method of modification or replacement.
 The structural modification point (the point in time to begin the modification).
The service information for these maintenance actions must include all the information
above plus the procedures for accomplishing them. See Appendix 6 for further information
on inspection start point and modification start point.
c. The maintenance actions required to support the LOV, if any, fall into one or more of the
following categories—
11
01/10/11 AC 120-104
(1) Mandatory Maintenance Actions Supporting the LOV. Design approval
holders may decide to use only existing type design data and maintenance actions for
which service information has been mandated by an AD. Modifications and
replacements mandated by AD would be identified with the airplane structural
configuration to be evaluated, and thus would be already included in the LOV. If an
inspection previously mandated by AD to address WFD will be used to support the
LOV, it should be identified and included with the LOV.
(2) Maintenance Actions Identified and Already Issued. Design approval
holders may choose to use previously published service information to establish the
LOV. A list of such maintenance actions must be submitted to the FAA Oversight
Office. The FAA will then issue ADs to ensure that operators perform these
maintenance actions to support the LOV.
(3) Maintenance Actions Identified, but Not Issued. Design approval holders
may propose to support an LOV farther out in time by using new maintenance actions—
maintenance actions for which service information has not yet been published. In this
case, the design approval holder must submit to the FAA Oversight Office a list
identifying each of those maintenance actions and a binding schedule for when they will
be made available. This schedule should allow for the time required by the FAA AD
rulemaking process, as well as for the time required for operators to incorporate those
maintenance actions into their maintenance programs and carry out those maintenance
tasks. This is to ensure that high-time airplanes do not pass the threshold for beginning
inspections or modifications before those inspections or modifications have been made
mandatory.
206. REQUIREMENT FOR AIRWORTHINESS LIMITATIONS SECTION. The
Airworthiness Limitations section of the Instructions for Continued Airworthiness is required by
part 25, Amendment 25-54 (September 11, 1980) and later. Airplanes certificated to
Amendment 25-54 and later will have an Airworthiness Limitations section specifying those
items with mandatory replacement or inspection times and related structural inspection
procedures approved under § 25.571. Before 1980 those airworthiness limitations had been
contained in chapter 5 of the airplane maintenance manual. Under § 26.21, a design approval
holder with airplanes that do not have an Airworthiness Limitations section must create one and
include the LOV. If an airplane does have an Airworthiness Limitations section, the design
approval holder must revise it to include the LOV. Any new Airworthiness Limitations section
and any Airworthiness Limitations section revision must be submitted to the FAA Oversight
Office for review and approval.
207. SUPPORTING DATA. Supporting data for the LOV must include:
a. Identification of the airplane structural configurations that were evaluated.
12
01/10/11 AC 120-104
b. Summary of the operational statistics of the fleet, including accumulated flight cycles
and flight hours.
c. Assumptions made about operational loading.
d. Identification and description of the structure susceptible to WFD.
e. Identification and description of the analytical methods used in the WFD evaluation.
f. Results of the WFD evaluations.
g. Guidance on reporting inspection findings (see paragraph 210 and Chapter 4 of this AC
for further information).
208. FAA OVERSIGHT OFFICE APPROVAL. The items that require FAA approval are:
a. The compliance plan.
b. An Airworthiness Limitations section with the LOV incorporated (and supporting data).
c. The list of any required maintenance actions not mandated by airworthiness directives.
d. A binding schedule for publishing any required service information not yet published.
The time it takes for FAA approval of compliance data will be determined by the quality of
design approval holders’ submissions and the responsiveness of design approval holders to issues
raised by the FAA.
209. MAKING LOV DATA AVAILABLE. Once the initial LOV is approved by the FAA
Oversight Office, you must make the LOV available to operators of affected airplanes. This
could be by normal business procedures, such as through the existing revision distribution
processes, by website access, by e-mail, or by U.S. mail.
210. DESIGN APPROVAL HOLDER REPORTING. Reporting requirements for design
approval holders remain the same. However, when reporting structural defects in compliance
with existing rules, design approval holders should include the following information:
a. Description (with a sketch) of the damage, including crack length, orientation, location,
flight cycles/hours, and condition of structure.
b. Results of follow-up inspections by operators that identify similar problems on other
airplanes in the fleet.
13
01/10/11 AC 120-104
c. Findings from inspections performed during repair, modification, or replacement that
identify additional similar damage sites.
d. Description of adjacent repairs within the same structure.
14
01/10/11 AC 120-104
CHAPTER 3—§ 26.23 EXTENDED LOVS
300. GENERAL INFORMATION ABOUT CHAPTER 3. This chapter gives guidance for
extending an LOV approved under § 25.571, § 26.21, or § 26.23. The requirements for
extending an LOV are the same as those for establishing the initial LOV except for the
differences noted in Table 2 below. This chapter explains the process involved, the
documentation required, and the deliverables.
Table 2
Differences between LOV and Extended LOV
§ 26.21
§ 26.23
(Initial LOV— § 25.571
(Extended LOV—optional)
required) (Initial LOV—required)
Who Establishes the Any Person (STC required if not
DAH Applicant
LOV? DAH)
Airplanes with an LOV per
What Airplanes Are Airplanes> 75,000
All Transport Category Airplanes §§ 25.571,
Affected? lbs MTGW
26.21, 26.23
What Configuration is Configuration at Configuration at Approval Date of
Configuration of production airplane
Considered? Effective Rule Date Extended LOV
How are Maintenance Airworthiness Placement in Airworthiness
Placement in Airworthiness Limitations section
Actions Mandated? Directive Limitations Section
By Date of TC Approval or Delivery of the First
When is Unpublished By Date Indicated in
Airplane or Issuance of a Standard Certificate of By Date of Approval of the
Service Information the Binding
Airworthiness or Date of LOV Approval, Whichever Extension
Due? Schedule
Occurs Latest
Not Required by § 26.23 but
Not Required by § 25.571 but Recommended as
Is Compliance Plan Recommended as Part of the
Yes per § 26.21(d) Part of the Normal Certification Process per Part
Required? Normal Certification Process Per
21
part 21
301. APPLICATION FOR EXTENDED LOV. Any person may apply to extend an existing
LOV established under § 25.571, § 26.21, or § 26.23. The applicant must demonstrate that WFD
will not occur in the airplane up to the proposed extended LOV. The applicant should consider
the age (flight cycles or flight hours or both) of high-time airplanes relative to the existing LOV to
determine when to begin developing data to extend it. Because the data is likely to include
additional full-scale fatigue testing, the applicant should allow sufficient time (e.g., four years) to
15
01/10/11 AC 120-104
complete such testing and to submit the compliance data for approval. An extended LOV is a
major change to the type design of an airplane. Thus any person applying for an extended LOV
must use the processes for an amended type certificate (ATC) (subpart D of 14 CFR part 21) or
supplemental type certificate (STC) (subpart E of part 21). An extended LOV may also include
specified maintenance actions, which would be part of the new LOV approval. Extended LOVs,
along with any required maintenance actions for the extended LOV, would be incorporated into
the Airworthiness Limitations section.
302. AIRPLANE STRUCTURAL CONFIGURATION FOR AN EXTENDED LOV. Persons
seeking approval of an extended LOV must identify the airplane structural configuration for each
airplane model they are evaluating for WFD and perform that evaluation. The applicant need not
extend the LOV for the entire group of airplanes for which the existing LOV was established and
instead may extend the LOV for only a subset of those airplanes. The structural configuration
considered must be the configuration evaluated for the existing LOV plus any additional
modifications and replacements mandated by airworthiness directive up to the approval date of the
extended LOV.
303. ESTABLISHING AN EXTENDED LOV AND SUPPORTING DATA. The process for
establishing an extended LOV, and the documentation required, is the same as that for an initial
LOV. Depending on where in the life of the airplane the initial LOV was established, this may
mean that full scale fatigue tests are necessary to substantiate the extended LOV. See AC
25.571-1D for guidance on performing full-scale fatigue tests.
304. AIRWORTHINESS LIMITATIONS SECTION. Only design approval holders may revise
the Airworthiness Limitations section of the Instructions for Continued Airworthiness for their
airplanes. Anyone else adding limitations must do so in the form of a supplement. The extended
LOV, along with any service information that supports it, must be incorporated into the
Airworthiness Limitations section. Type certificate holders would do this in the form of a
revision, and other persons would add a supplement. Service information documented in the
Airworthiness Limitations section or any supplement to it becomes airworthiness limitation items.
305. FAA APPROVALS FOR EXTENDED LOVS. For approval of an extended LOV the
applicant and the FAA would follow the same procedures they use during approval of amended
type certificates or supplemental type certificates. For an extended LOV, the Airworthiness
Limitations section, with the LOV and any required service information incorporated (and
supporting data), requires FAA approval.
16
01/10/11 AC 120-104
CHAPTER 4—COMPLIANCE INFORMATION FOR OPERATORS
400. GENERAL INFORMATION FOR OPERATORS. This chapter tells operators how to
incorporate an LOV approved by the FAA Oversight Office into their maintenance programs. It
applies to 14 CFR part 121operators of transport category airplanes and to foreign air carriers or
foreign persons operating U.S.-registered transport category airplanes under 14 CFR part 129.
Under § 121.1115 and § 129.115, no one may operate an affected airplane unless it has an
Airworthiness Limitations section with an LOV approved under Appendix H to part 25 or
§ 26.21. Under § 91.403(c), an operator must comply with any Airworthiness Limitations
section referenced in operations specifications issued to it under part 121 or 129. This chapter
describes the process for incorporating the Airworthiness Limitations section with the LOV into
the maintenance program and the procedure for approval of the maintenance program revisions
by the principal maintenance inspector (PMI). If a design approval holder develops maintenance
actions to support the LOV under § 26.21, those maintenance actions would be mandated by AD.
This chapter also provides guidance to operators who choose to incorporate an extended LOV. If
there are any maintenance actions developed to support the extended LOV, they will be included
in the Airworthiness Limitations section.
401. AIRWORTHINESS LIMITATIONS SECTION. Depending on the airplane’s
certification basis, a design approval holder would have either revised an Airworthiness
Limitations section or established a new one to include the LOV for affected airplanes. The
design approval holder must make the Airworthiness Limitations section available to operators
(see paragraph 209) for incorporation into their maintenance programs.
a. Airplanes Subject to § 26.21. For any existing airplane that does not have an
Airworthiness Limitations section, the design approval holder must create one under
§ 26.21 to include an LOV. If an existing airplanes does have an Airworthiness Limitations
section, the design approval holder would revise it under § 26.21 to include an LOV.
b. Airplanes with Type Certificates Applied for After January 14, 2011,
Subject to § 25.571. Unlike § 26.21, § 25.571 applies to all transport category
airplanes, regardless of the rule under which they are operated. Under § 25.571, the FAA
may issue a design approval for an airplane model before full-scale fatigue testing has been
completed. The design approval holder would establish the LOV after completion of this
testing, in accordance with an FAA-approved schedule. Operators may operate such
airplanes while the design approval holder is performing the fatigue testing. To do this,
they must incorporate into their maintenance program the Airworthiness Limitations
section with a number of cycles equal to ½ the number of cycles accumulated on the
fatigue test article. Under § 91.403(c), operators may not fly these airplanes beyond that
limitation. The number of cycles in the Airworthiness Limitations section may be revised
by the design approval holder as additional cycles are accumulated on the test article.
Although it is not required, operators may then revise their maintenance program to reflect
17
01/10/11 AC 120-104
the new number. Once fatigue testing is complete and the LOV is established and
approved, operators may revise their maintenance program to include the LOV. If they do
not, the previously described number of cycles entered into the Airworthiness Limitations
section will serve as the LOV. The LOV is an airworthiness limitation, and no airplane
may be operated beyond the LOV stated in the Airworthiness Limitations section.
402. AIRPLANES WITHOUT LOVs. Operators may be faced with a situation where an
LOV for a certain model airplane is not available for compliance with the operating rule. This
may happen because the design approval holder has not provided an LOV, or it can happen
because the operator wants to operate an airplane on the excluded list for § 26.21 and the design
approval holder wasn’t required to develop one.
 If the design approval holder has not provided an LOV on an airplane for which it was
required, the operator may use the default LOV published in Table 1 of § 121.1115 or
§ 129.115.
 If an operator intends to operate an airplane on the exclusion list of § 26.21, that
operator may develop its own LOV or use the default LOV published in Table 2 of
§ 121.1115 or § 129.115.
Because these default LOVs are part of §§ 121.1115 and 129.115, there is no further need for
FAA Oversight Office approval. However, the operator must still receive principal maintenance
inspector approval to incorporate the default LOV into its maintenance program.
403. ADDING AN AIRPLANE TO AN OPERATOR’S FLEET AFTER THE
COMPLIANCE DATE HAS PASSED. Before an air carrier adds an airplane to its operations
specifications, the following applies:
a. If the airplane was previously operated under an FAA-approved maintenance program,
the new operator must ensure that the applicable LOV is incorporated into its maintenance
program.
b. If the airplane was not previously operated under an FAA-approved maintenance
program, the operator must incorporate the applicable LOV.
c. If the airplane is U.S.-registered, and will be in use in operations under 14 CFR part 129,
the foreign owner or operator must incorporate the ALS containing the LOV into the
maintenance program.
404. EXTENDED LOVS. Any person may apply for an extended LOV. Section 26.23 defines
an extended LOV as a major change to the type design of an airplane. An applicant must use the
amended type certificate or supplemental type certificate process when applying for an extended
LOV. See Chapter 3 of this AC for further guidance. To operate an airplane to its extended
18
01/10/11 AC 120-104
LOV, operators may need to perform maintenance actions to prevent WFD from occurring.
Those maintenance actions must be specified as airworthiness limitation items in the
Airworthiness Limitations section of the Instructions for Continued Airworthiness. If an
extended LOV is approved for an airplane, operators are not required to incorporate it unless
they want to operate the airplane beyond the current LOV (initial or previously-approved
extended LOV) in effect. The person with the approved extended LOV is not required to make it
available to all operators of airplanes for which it is applicable.
405. PMI APPROVAL. Operators must submit maintenance program revisions, containing the
Airworthiness Limitations section with the LOV, to the principal maintenance inspector or Flight
Standards International Field Office for review and approval. After the principal maintenance
inspector or Flight Standards International Field Office has found these changes acceptable, they
would approve the revision through the existing approval processes for time limitations. Any
subsequent revision to this limit will follow the same approval process. The Airworthiness
Limitations section must be clearly distinguishable within the maintenance program.
406. OPERATOR REPORTING. Reporting requirements for operators remain the same.
However, when reporting fatigue-related structural defects in compliance with existing rules,
operators should include the following information:
 Description (with a sketch) of the damage, including crack length, orientation, location,
flight cycles/hours, and condition of structure.
 Results of follow-up inspections by operators that identify similar problems on other
airplanes in the fleet.
 Findings from inspections performed during repair, modification, or replacement that
identify additional similar damage sites.
 Description of adjacent repairs within the same structure.
Operators should also report the items above, and all suspected cases of multiple site
damage/multiple element damage, to design approval holders and, if possible, provide them with
the damaged structure for examination and further assessment.
19
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 1
APPENDIX 1
RELATED REGULATIONS AND DOCUMENTS
The regulatory basis of this AC is comprised of the following parts of 14 CFR:
 Part 21, Certification Procedures for Products and Parts.
 Part 25, Airworthiness Standards.
 Part 26, Continued Airworthiness and Safety Improvements: Transport Category
Airplanes.
 Part 43, Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, Rebuilding, and Alteration.
 Part 119, Certification: Air Carriers and Commercial Operators.
 Part 121, Operating Requirements: Domestic, Flag, and Supplemental Operations.
 Part 121, Subpart AA, Continued Airworthiness and Safety Improvements.
 Part 129, Foreign Air Carriers and Foreign Operators of U.S.-Registered Aircraft
Engaged in Common Carriage, Subpart B, Continued Airworthiness and safety
Improvements.
You can download an electronic copy of 14 CFR from the Internet at
http://www.gpoaccess.gov/cfr/. A paper copy may be ordered by sending a request to the U.S.
Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402-0001,
or by calling telephone number (202) 512-1800; or by sending a request by facsimile to (202)
512-2250. Below are the specific regulations pertinent to this AC:
a. § 21.3, Reporting of failures, malfunctions, and defects.
b. § 21.50, Instructions for continued airworthiness and manufacturer’s maintenance
manuals having airworthiness limitations sections.
c. § 21.101, Designation of applicable regulations.
d. § 25.571, Damage-tolerance and fatigue evaluation of structure.
e. § 25.1529, Instructions for continued airworthiness.
f. Appendix H to part 25, Instructions for Continued Airworthiness.
A1-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 1
g. § 26.21, Limit of validity.
h. § 26.23, Extended limit of validity.
i. § 43.13, Performance rules (general).
j. § 43.16, Airworthiness limitations.
k. § 91.403, General (under Maintenance, Preventive Maintenance, and Alterations).
l. § 121.703, Service difficulty reports.
m. § 121.1115, Limit of Validity.
n. § 129.115, Limit of Validity.
REFERENCES. The following list of related documents is provided for information purposes
and are not necessarily directly referenced in this AC.
a. Advisory Circulars. Electronic copies of the following ACs can be downloaded from
the Internet at http://www.faa.gov/rgl. Paper copies may be ordered from the U.S.
Department of Transportation, Subsequent Distribution Office, M-30, Ardmore East
Business Center, 3341 Q 75th Avenue, Landover, MD 20785.
(1) AC 20-107B, “Composite Aircraft Structure.”
(2) AC 21.101-1, “Establishing the Certification Basis of Changed Aeronautical
Products.”
(4) AC 26-1, “Part 26, Continued Airworthiness and Safety Improvements.”
(5) AC 25.571-1D, “Damage Tolerance and Fatigue Evaluation of Structure.”
(6) AC 25.1529-1A, “Instructions for Continued Airworthiness of Structural Repairs on
Transport Airplanes.”
(7) AC 91-56B, “Continuing Structural Integrity Program for Airplanes.”
(8) AC 91-82, “Fatigue Management Programs for Airplanes with Demonstrated Risk
of Catastrophic Failure Due to Fatigue.”
(9) AC 120-16E, “Air Carrier Maintenance Programs.”
A1-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 1
(10) AC 120-73, “Damage Tolerance Assessment of Repairs to Pressurized Fuselages.”
(11) AC 120-93 “Damage Tolerance Inspections for Repairs and Alterations.”
b. FAA Policy. An electronic copy of the following policy statement can be downloaded
from the Internet at http://www.faa.gov/rgl. A paper copy may be ordered from the Federal
Aviation Administration, Transport Airplane Directorate, Transport Standards Staff,
Standardization Branch, ANM-113, 1601 Lind Avenue SW., Renton, WA 98055-4056.
 PS-ANM110-7-12-2005, Policy Statement, “Safety – A Shared Responsibility - New
Direction for Addressing Airworthiness Issues for Transport Airplanes,” issued July
6, 2005, effective July 12, 2005.
c. FAA Orders. Electronic copies of the following Orders can be downloaded from the
Internet at http://www.faa.gov/rgl. Paper copies may be ordered from the U.S. Department
of Transportation, Subsequent Distribution Office, M-30, Ardmore East Business Center,
3341 Q 75th Avenue, Landover, MD 20785.
(1) Order 8110.54, “Instructions for Continued Airworthiness Responsibilities,
Requirements, and Contents.”
(2) Order 8900.1, “Flight Standards Information Management System (FSIMS).”
(3) Order 8110.104, “Responsibilities and Requirements for Implementing Part 26
Safety Initiatives.”
d. Related Documents. Electronic copies of the following reports can be downloaded
from the Internet at http://www.faa.gov.
(1) “Recommendations for Regulatory Action to Prevent Widespread Fatigue Damage
in the Commercial Airplane Fleet,” Revision A, dated June 29, 1999 (A report of the
Airworthiness Assurance Working Group for the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory
Committee Transport Aircraft and Engine Issues).
(2) “Widespread Fatigue Damage Bridging Task Multiple Element Damage,” dated
July 23, 2003 (A report of the Airworthiness Assurance Working Group for the
Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee’s Transport Aircraft and Engine Issues
Group).
(3) Final Report of the AAWG – Continued Airworthiness of Structural Repairs,
September 12, 1996.
(4) A Report of the AAWG – Recommendations for Regulatory Action to Prevent
Widespread Fatigue Damage in the Commercial Airplane Fleet, March 11, 1999.
A1-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 1
(5) A Report of the AAWG - Recommendations For Regulatory Action To Enhance
Continued Airworthiness Of Supplemental Type Certificates, Final Report, January 21,
2003.
(6) ATA Report 51-93-01 - Structural Maintenance Program Guidelines For
Continuing Airworthiness.*
(7) A Report to the AAWG - Structures Task Group Guidelines Document, June 1996.
(8) A Report to the AAWG – Recommendations Concerning ARAC Tasking FR
Doc. 04-10816, Re: Aging Airplane Safety Final Rule, 14 CFR 121.370a and
129.16,Task 3 Final Report, March 22, 2007, Revised April 11, 2007.
*For a copy of this report, please contact the ATA: Air Transport Association of America,
Inc., 1301 Pennsylvania Avenue., NW, Suite 1100, Washington, DC 20004-1707;
telephone (202) 626-4000.
A1-4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 2
APPENDIX 2
DEFINITIONS
For purposes of this AC, the following definitions apply:
Airplane structural configuration—The approved type certificate design, which includes
the original design, any model variations or derivatives, and alterations or replacements
mandated by AD.
Airworthiness limitation item (ALI)—A maintenance action item identified in the
Airworthiness Limitation section of a design approval holder’s Instructions for Continued
Airworthiness. These items may contain mandatory modification or replacement times,
mandatory inspection times, or inspection procedures.
Airworthiness Limitations section (ALS)—A collection of mandatory maintenance actions
required for an airplane’s structure and fuel tank systems. The Airworthiness Limitations section
is part of an airplane’s Instructions for Continued Airworthiness. For structural maintenance
actions, the ALS includes structural modification times, replacement times, structural inspection
thresholds and intervals, and related structural inspection procedures.
Alteration or modification—A design change made to an airplane. Within the context of this
AC, the two terms are synonymous.
Amended type certificate (ATC)—An approved change to an airplane’s original type
certificate made by the type certificate holder. Only the holder of the type certificate may apply
for an amended type certificate.
Baseline structure—The structure that is designed under the original type certificate or
amended type certificate for that airplane model.
Damage tolerance —The attribute of a structure that permits it to retain its required residual
strength without detrimental structural deformation for a period of use after the structure has
sustained a given level of fatigue, corrosion, or accidental or discrete source damage.
A2-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 2
Design approval holder—The term applied to the holder of any design approval, including
type certificate, amended type certificate, supplemental type certificate, amended supplemental
type certificate, parts manufacturer approval, TSO authorization, letter of TSO design approval,
and field approval (FAA Form 337).
Design service goal (DSG)—The period of time (in flight cycles or flight hours, or both)
established at design and/or certification during which the principal structure of an airplane will
be reasonably free from significant cracking.
Fatigue-critical baseline structure—The part of the baseline structure of an airplane that is
classified as fatigue-critical.
Fatigue critical structure—Structure of an airplane that is susceptible to fatigue cracking that
could lead to a catastrophic failure of the airplane. For the purposes of this AC, fatigue-critical
structure refers to the same class of structure as the structure that would need to be assessed for
compliance with § 25.571(a) at Amendment 25-45 or later. The term fatigue-critical structure
may refer to fatigue-critical baseline structure, fatigue-critical alteration structure, or both.
FAA Oversight Office—The aircraft certification office or office of the Transport Airplane
Directorate having oversight responsibility for the relevant type certificate or supplemental type
certificate, as determined by the Administrator.
Flight Standards Service Offices—Offices located in FAA headquarters responsible for
developing guidance and policy applicable to transport category airplanes for Aircraft Evaluation
Group personnel and Flight Standards Service field personnel (maintenance, avionics, and
operations Aviation Safety Inspectors) in the conduct of their responsibilities.
Inspection start point (ISP)—The point in time when special inspections of the fleet are
initiated because of a specific probability of having a multiple site damage/multiple element
damage condition.
Instructions for Continued Airworthiness (ICA)—Maintenance actions developed by the
TC or STC holder in accordance with 14 CFR 25.1529 and delivered with the airplane in
accordance with 14 CFR 21.50. Instructions for continued airworthiness are documentation that
set forth instructions and requirements for the maintenance that is essential to the continued
airworthiness of an aircraft, engine, or propeller.
A2-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 2
Limit of validity (of the engineering data that supports the structural maintenance
program)—The period of time (in flight cycles, flight hours, or both), up to which it has been
demonstrated by test evidence, analysis and, if available, service experience and teardown
inspection results of high-time airplanes, that widespread fatigue damage will not occur in the
airplane structure.
Maintenance actions—Inspections, modifications, replacements, or any combination of
these.
Multiple site damage (MSD)—A source of widespread fatigue damage characterized by the
simultaneous presence of fatigue cracks in the same structural elements.
Multiple element damage (MED)—A source of widespread fatigue damage characterized by
the simultaneous presence of fatigue cracks in similar adjacent structural elements.
Structural modification point (SMP)—The point in time when a structural area must be
modified to preclude WFD.
Scatter factor—A life reduction factor used in the interpretation of fatigue analysis and fatigue
test results.
Structures Task Group—A model-specific airplane industry group that consists of type
certificate holders and operators responsible for developing aging airplane model-specific
programs. Such a group also includes regulatory authorities who approve and monitor those
programs.
Supplemental Structural Inspection Program—A damage-tolerance-based inspection
program. Structural inspection programs only address the structure identified by the type
certificate holder using the guidance contained in AC 91-56.
Teardown Inspection—The term used for the process of disassembling structure and using
destructive inspection techniques or visual (e.g., magnifying glass and dye penetrant) or other
non-destructive (e.g., eddy current, ultrasound) inspection techniques to identify the extent of
damage within a structure caused by fatigue, corrosion, and accidental damage.
A2-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 2
Test-to-structure factors—A series of factors used to adjust test results to full-scale
structure. These factors could include, but are not limited to, differences in—
 Stress spectrum,
 Boundary conditions,
 Specimen configuration,
 Material differences,
 Geometric considerations, and
 Environmental effects.
Type design—The engineering definition of a particular product. The type design consists of
the following (see 14 CFR § 21.31):
 Drawings and specifications,
 Dimensions, materials, and processes,
 Airworthiness limitations,
 (for primary category aircraft, if desired) A special inspection and preventive
maintenance program designed to be accomplished by an appropriately rated and
trained pilot/owner, and
 Other data to describe the product design and to determine the airworthiness,
noise characteristics, fuel venting, and exhaust emissions (where applicable).
WFD —The point in time when, without intervention, 50% of the fleet is expected
(average behavior)
to develop WFD for a particular structure.
Widespread fatigue damage (WFD)—The simultaneous presence of cracks at multiple
structural locations that are of sufficient size and density that the structure will no longer meet
the residual strength requirements of § 25.571(b).
A2-4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 3
APPENDIX 3
ACRONYMS USED IN THIS AC
AAWG Airworthiness Assurance Working Group
AC Advisory Circular
AD Airworthiness Directive
ALS Airworthiness Limitations section
ARAC Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee
ATC Amended Type Certificate
DAH Design Approval Holder
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
ICA Instructions for Continued Airworthiness
LOV Limit of Validity of the Engineering Data that
Supports the Structural Maintenance Program
ISP Inspection Start Point
MED Multiple Element Damage
MSD Multiple Site Damage
MSG Maintenance Steering Group
PMI Principal Maintenance Inspector
SMP Structural Modification Point
SSID Supplemental Structural Inspection Document
SSIP Supplemental Structural Inspection Program
STC Supplemental Type Certificate
TC Type Certificate
WFD Widespread Fatigue Damage
A3-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 4
APPENDIX 4
BACKGROUND
Structural fatigue is the degradation of a material subjected to repeated structural loads. Fatigue
of metallic structure is recognized as a significant threat to the continued airworthiness of
airplanes. This is because even small fatigue cracks can significantly reduce the strength of
airplane structure. For over 50 years, the airworthiness standards for certification of new
transport category airplanes have addressed fatigue. These airworthiness standards are meant to
prevent catastrophic failures due to fatigue throughout the anticipated operational life of the
airplane. These standards have evolved over the years and have changed as the relevant
knowledge base has increased. This knowledge includes service experience, specific incidents
and accidents, and technological advances in design, analysis, testing, manufacturing, and
inspection of airplanes.
One of the first significant changes in the airworthiness standards occurred in March 1956, with
the revision of the fatigue evaluation requirements contained in Civil Air Regulations (CAR)
4b.270. This revision added “fail-safe strength” as an option to the “fatigue strength” approach
for addressing fatigue. Motivation for this change was the realization that precluding the
occurrence of fatigue cracking might not always be possible and, therefore, as an option, the
structure may be designed to survive cracking. The fatigue strength approach aims for a design
where fatigue cracking is not probable within the operational life of the airplane. The fail-safe
approach assumes that cracking could occur, but that a specified minimum strength could be
maintained after a “fatigue failure or obvious partial failure.” The efficacy of the fail-safe
approach was not only dependent on the structure keeping the specified minimum strength with
the fatigue damage present, but also on finding the damage during normal maintenance. As
applied, the fail-safe approach emphasizes redundancy as opposed to fatigue performance, and
inspectability is assumed and not quantified. The fail-safe option was the predominant approach
chosen for most large transport category airplanes certified in the 1960s and 1970s.
Another significant change in the airworthiness standards for fatigue occurred in October 1978
with Amendment 25-45, when § 25.571 was revised and § 25.573 was deleted. This change
involved removing the fail-safe option entirely and establishing a new requirement to develop
damage-tolerance-based inspections wherever practical. The fatigue strength approach, as a
default option, is used only if the damage-tolerance approach is impractical. The motivation for
the 1978 change was the recognition, based on mounting evidence, that the fail-safe approach
that had been applied up to that point was not reliable and would not achieve the desired level of
safety. Specific areas of concern with the fail-safe approach included loss of “fail-safety” with
age. This was because of the increased probability of cracking in the structure adjacent to the
fatigue failure, or obvious partial failure, and the lack of directed inspections and quantification
of residual life with the assumed damage present. It was agreed at the time that more emphasis
was needed on where and how fatigue cracking could occur in the structure, and on quantifying
crack growth and residual strength characteristics. Such an approach includes knowledge of
damage tolerance characteristics and development of effective inspection protocols, such as
A4-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 4
where, when, how, and how often to inspect. The 1978 changes achieved this for certification of
new transport category airplanes.
The same events and reasoning that drove the changes to airworthiness standards for new
airplanes also influenced the strategy adopted to ensure continued airworthiness of the existing
fleet. There was increasing concern about existing older airplanes that had been certified
according to the fail-safe requirements of CAR 4b.270. Eleven large transport models were
specifically identified as needing the most attention. The FAA determined a need to develop
damage-tolerance-based inspection programs. These inspections supplemented existing
maintenance inspections, so they were referred to as Supplemental Structural Inspection
Programs (SSIPs). The inspection requirements for these programs were documented in
supplemental structural inspection documents (SSIDs). It was also agreed that SSIDs would be
developed by the original equipment manufacturers on a voluntary basis and then mandated by
airworthiness directives. The Civil Aviation Authority for the United Kingdom published
guidance for developing the SSIPs in Airworthiness Notice No. 89, Continuing Structural
Integrity of Transport Aeroplanes, dated August 23, 1978, and the FAA published guidance for
developing the SSIPs on May 6, 1981 in AC No. 91-56, Supplemental Structural Inspection
Program for Large Transport Category Airplanes. SSIPs were subsequently developed and
documented in SSIDs and mandated by airworthiness directives for the eleven aging model
airplanes.
In April 1988, one of the eleven aging model airplanes suffered major structural damage to its
pressurized fuselage because of undetected fatigue cracking of the baseline primary structure.
Although that airplane had an SSIP that was mandated by an airworthiness directive, there were
no special directed inspections for fatigue cracks at multiple structural locations. This was
because it was believed that the link-up of multiple fatigue cracks in one skin frame bay would
result in safe decompression by skin flapping.3 It was thought that the damage to the fuselage
skin would be obvious by inspection or by the inability to pressurize the fuselage. The accident
was attributed, in part, to the aging of the airplane involved. This aging included the
simultaneous presence of small fatigue cracks at multiple locations in the fuselage skin lap
splice. Instead of being obvious, those cracks grew undetected. Then they linked up quickly to
cause catastrophic failure of a large section of the fuselage.
That accident precipitated actions that culminated in regulations aimed at avoiding catastrophic
failures from fatigue in existing and future airplanes. In response to the April 1988 accident, the
FAA sponsored a conference on aging airplanes and established a task force representing the
interests of the airplane operators, airplane manufacturers, regulatory authorities, and other
aviation representatives. This task force was later renamed the Airworthiness Assurance
Working Group (AAWG). They specifically recommended establishment of an Aging Aircraft
Program to address long-term airworthiness issues in airplane structure that result from aging.
The AAWG also recommended that the program include an element for addressing fatigue
cracking at multiple structural locations. The National Transportation Safety Board
recommended that design approval holders discontinue classifying fuselage skin as “malfunction
evident” or “damage obvious” in SSIDs.
3 Flapping is a phenomenon that occurs in cracks in fuselage skin subjected to cabin pressure. When the two tips of
the crack meet stiffened structure, they change direction and turn away from the stiffened structure.
A4-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 4
The April 1988 accident also precipitated Congressional legislation. In October 1991, Congress
enacted Title IV of Public Law 102-143, the Aging Airplane Safety Act of 1991 (AASA). The
AASA had two key elements:
(1) It required “the Administrator to make such inspections and conduct such reviews of
maintenance and other records of each airplane used by an operator to provide air
transportation as may be necessary to determine that such is in a safe condition and is
properly maintained for operation in air transportation.”
(2) It specified that an operator must be able to demonstrate, as part of that inspection, “that
maintenance of the airplane’s structure, skin, and other age sensitive parts and components
have been adequate and timely enough to ensure the highest level of safety.”
The SSIPs were revised to remove the methodology for classifying certain fatigue cracking in
structures as “malfunction evident” or “damage obvious” and to include damage-tolerance-based
inspections for those structures. The FAA issued airworthiness directives to mandate those
changes. The supplemental structural inspection program is one element of the overall Aging
Aircraft Program for structures. We also adopted changes to operating rules and issued
airworthiness directives to mandate, in part, other elements of the Aging Aircraft Program,
including:
 The Mandatory Modification Program.
 The Repair Assessment Program.
 The Corrosion Prevention and Control Program.
For further discussion on the Aging Aircraft Program for structures, see AC 91-56B.
In response to the AASA, in part, the FAA issued the Aging Airplane Safety Final Rule,4 and the
Damage Tolerance Data Rule,5 and guidance material. The Damage Tolerance Data Rule is the
design-approval-holder component that facilitates operator compliance with the Aging Airplane
Safety Final Rule. For further background information and discussion on these rules, see AC
120-93.
In 1998, the FAA amended § 25.571 (Amendment 25-966) of the aircraft certification
requirements for transport category airplanes. Under this amendment, we introduced the term
widespread fatigue damage (WFD) into § 25.571. Widespread fatigue damage is a condition that
occurs when there is simultaneous presence of fatigue cracks at multiple structural locations that
are of sufficient size and density that the structure will no longer meet the residual strength
requirements of § 25.571(b). As part of the certification process, § 25.571 requires full-scale
fatigue test evidence to demonstrate that WFD will not occur before an airplane reaches its
design service goal.
4 Aging Airplane Safety: 70 FR 5518; February 2, 2005
5 Damage Tolerance Data for Repairs and Alterations: 72 FR 70486; December 12, 2007
6 Damage-Tolerance and Fatigue Evaluation of Structure: 63 FR 15707; March 31, 1998
A4-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 4
Another significant change in the airworthiness standards for fatigue occurred in November 2010
with the issuance of Amendment Nos. 25-132 and 26-57 when the FAA revised § 25.571 and
added §§ 26.21 and 26.23. We determined that this change was necessary because the structural
fatigue characteristics of airplanes are understood only up to the point where analyses and testing
of the structure are valid. Until Amendment Nos. 25-132 and 26-5,, there were no requirements
to limit the operation of airplanes based on existing engineering data to prevent catastrophic
failures from WFD. We adopted these amendments to require that design approval holders
establish a limit of validity of the engineering data that supports the structural maintenance
program (LOV) and demonstrate that WFD will not occur in the airplane before it reaches LOV.
Under this change, we also added §§ 121.1115 and 129.115 in Amendment Nos. 121-351 and
129-48, to prohibit operation of an airplane beyond its LOV. Section 26.23 provides an option
for any person to extend the LOV and to develop the maintenance actions that support the
extended limit. Thereafter, to operate an airplane beyond the existing LOV, an operator must
incorporate the extended LOV and associated maintenance actions into its maintenance program.
The airplane may not be operated beyond the extended LOV. These amendments, which
specifically addresses WFD, is intended to be the last element of the overall Aging Aircraft
Program for structures.
7 Aging Aircraft Program: Widespread Fatigue Damage: 75 FR 69746, November 15, 2010.
A4-4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
APPENDIX 5
EXAMPLES OF STRUCTURE SUSCEPTIBLE TO WFD
STRUCTURAL AREA SEE FIGURE
Longitudinal Skin Joints, Frames, and Tear Straps (MSD/MED) 5-1
Circumferential Joints and Stringers (MSD/MED) 5-2
Lap Joints with Milled, Chem-milled or Bonded Radius (MSD) 5-3
Fuselage Frames (MED) 5-4
Stringer to Frame Attachments (MED) 5-5
Shear Clip End Fasteners on Shear Tied Fuselage Frames (MSD/MED) 5-6
Aft Pressure Dome Outer Ring and Dome Web Splices (MSD/MED) 5-7
Skin Splice at Aft Pressure Bulkhead (MSD) 5-8
Abrupt Changes in Web or Skin Thickness — Pressurized or Unpressurized 5-9
Structure (MSD/MED)
Window Surround Structure (MSD, MED) 5-10
Over-Wing Fuselage Attachments (MED) 5-11
Latches and Hinges of Non-plug Doors (MSD/MED) 5-12
Skin at Runout of Large Doubler (MSD)—Fuselage, Wing or Empennage 5-13
Wing or Empennage Chordwise Splices (MSD/MED) 5-14
Rib-to-Skin Attachments (MSD/MED) 5-15
Typical Wing and Empennage Construction (MSD/MED) 5-16
A5-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-1 Longitudinal Skin Joints, Frames, and Tear Straps (MSD/MED)
(a) Lap joint (b) Butt joint (c) Lap joint
with radius
Outer skin -1-
----+U--
upper rivet
row -u-
Stringer
Inner skin­
lower rivet
row
Type and possible location of MSD and MED Service or test experience of factors that influence MSD
• MSD longitudinal skin joint and MED (examples)
• Lap joint • High stress-misuse of data from coupon test
-Outer skin upper rivet row • Corrosion
-Inner skin lower rivet row • Disbond
• Butt joint • Manufacturing defect
-Skin outer rivet rows • Surface preparation
-Doubler Inner rivet rows • Bond laminate too thin
• Lap joint with radius • Countersink, fastener fit
-In radius • Design defect- surface preparation process
• MED- frame
• Stress concentration areas
• MED- tear straps
• Crittcal fastener rows in the skin at tear strap joint
Figure 5-2 Circumferential Joints and Stringers (MSD/MED)
Circumferential (a) Without (b) With outer
splice plate outer doubler doubler
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
• MSD- circumferential joint MSD and/or MED (examples)
• Without outer doubler • High secondary bending
-Splice plate- between and/or at the inner two • High stress level in splice plate and joining stringers
rivet rows (misuse of data from coupon test)
-Skin- forward and aft rivet row of splice plate • Poor design (wrong material)
-Skin-at first fastener of stringer coupling • Underdesign (over-estimation of interference fit fasteners)
• With outer doubler
-Skin- outer rivet rows
-Splice plate/outer doubler- inner rivet rows
• MED- stringer/stringer couplings
-Stringer- at first fastener of stringer coupling
-Stringer coupling-in splice plate area
A5-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-3 Lap joints with Milled, Chem-milled or Bonded Radius (MSD)
Outer skin at milled Cracking
or chem-milled step
Bonded doubler
Bonded joint
Type and possible location of MSD and MED Service or test experience of factors that
influence MSD and MED (examples)
• MSD-abrupt cross section change
• High bending stresses due to
• Milled radius
eccentricity
• Chem-milled radius
• Bonded doubler runout
Figure 5-4 Fuselage Frames (MED)
Fuselage
skin panel
Typical fuselage Stringer
skin panel
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
MSD and/or MED (examples)
• MED- the cracking of frames at stringer cutouts
at successive longitudinal locations in the • High bending- noncircular frames
fuselage. The primary concern is for those areas • Local stress concentrations
where noncircular frames exist in the fuselage • Cutouts
structure. Fractures in those areas would result • Shear attachments
in panel instability.
A5-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-5 Stringer-to-Frame Attachments (MED)
Fuselage
skin panel
Type and possible location of MED Service or test experience of factors that
• MED- any combination of fracture of frames, clips, or influence MSD and/or MED (examples)
stringers, including the attachments, resulting in the • Poor load path connection
loss of the shear tie between the frame and stringer.
This condition may occur at either circumferential or
longitudinal locations at fuselage frame/stringer
intersection.
Figure 5-6 Shear Clip End Fasteners on Shear-Tied Fuselage Frame (MSD/MED)
~ -- Longeron or
stringer
Type and possible location of MSD and MED Service or test experience of factors that
influence MSD and MED (examples)
• MSD- skin at end fastener of shear clip
• Preload
• MED-cracking in stringer or longeron at frame attachment
• Localized bending due to pressure
• MED-cracking in frame at stringer or longeron attachment
• Discontinuous load path
A5-4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-7 Aft Pressure Dome Outer Ring and Dome Web Splices (MSD/MED)
Typical outer ring splices
~
~
Web splices
Legend:
F fastener ~ F
R radius
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
• MSD/MED- outer ring splice MSD and/or MED (examples)
• Attachment profiles- at fastener rows and/or in • Corrosior
radius area • High stresses- combined tension and compression
• MED- web splices • High induced bending in radius
• Bulkhead skin and/or splice plates- at critical • Inadequate finish in radius- surface roughness
fastener rows
Figure 5-8 Skin Splice at Aft Pressure Bulkhead (MSD)
Unpressurized skin
"T" frame
Service or test experience of factors that
influence MSD and MED (examples)
Type and possible location of MSD and MED • Shell discontinuous induced bending
• MSD-skin at end fastener holes stresses
• High load transfer at fastener
A5-5
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-9 Abrupt Changes in Web or Skin Thickness — Pressurized or
Unpressurized Structure (MSD/MED)
Web ors.kin
Typical oractong
Radll.iS
• Milloo
• Chem-m1lled
Bonded doub.ler
Type and possible location of MSD and MED
Service or test experience of factors
that influence MSD and MED
Abrupt change in stirfness
• Milled radius Pressure structure
• Chem-mmed radius
• High bending stresses at edge
• Bonded doubler support due to pressure
• Fastener row at edge support members
Non-pressure structure
Edge member support structure • Structural deflections cause high
• Edge member - in radius areas stresses at edge supports
Figure 5-10 Window Surround Structure (MSD, MED)
Window surround structure
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
• MSD- skin at attachment to window surround MSD and/or MED (examples)
structure • High load transfer
• MED-repeated details in reinforcement of
window cutouts or in window corners
A5-6
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-11 Over Wing Fuselage Attachments (MED)
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
• MED-repeated details in overwing fuselage MSD and/or MED (examples)
attachments • Manufacturing defect- prestress
• Induced deflections
Figure 5-12 Latches and Hinges of Non-plug Doors (MSD/MED)
..,._ Latch hook
View A Attach bolts ViewB
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that
• MSD-piano hinge influence MSD and/or MED (examples)
• At hinge fastener attachment row • Bending stresses due to fuselage elongation
• In fillet radius • High local stress
• Emanating from hole in lobes • Fretting
• MED-latches
• In multiple latch hooks
• At lube channel of latch spool
• At spool bracket attach bolts (also corrosion)
A5-7
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-13 Skin at Runout of Large Doubler (MSD) —
Fuselage, Wing, or Empennage
+ I
I+ I I jrI ±+ JI t I + I
~!i;-
-, I O- ~ - J - I~ - o - o - o - o o - o - o - o - o o - o - o - o - o - o --- o - o - o - o - o o - o - o - o - o - o o - o - o - o ---- 1
- +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++_LI
I°
T O ( + I 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o o o o ; g ;'I r+I 'o o o o o o o o o o o o o - g ;-I ( + Io I
I ol+II~ 1+1I~ 1+1ol
1 1
I ol+llo o o o o o o 0ll+1lo o o o o o o 011+1°1
-LI 0 1+
+ 11 0 o I
1
+
+
1
10
o1
1
+
+
1
01
~Id) l O _ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0) Idj I~_ 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Oj Id) ~ I
+
L - + c + ~ ~ + o + + + + + + + + + + + + J[ + ; _ + 1 C + o + + + + + + + + + + + o+ ~+ t+- !+l ?f- + J
l
O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O O
+ I 11 + 11 I I+ I
+ I +
Skin doubler
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
• MSD- cracks initiated at multiple critical MSD and/or MED (examples)
fastener holes in skin at runout of doubler • High load transfer- high local stress
Figure 5-14 Wing or Empennage Chordwise Splices (MSD/MED)
I IUlll .:)J.)01
/,
/ Typical skin and stringer splice
Chordwise joints
Type and possible location of MSD/MED Service or test experience of factors that influence
• MSD- skin and/or splice plate MSD and/or MED (examples)
• Chordwise critical fastener rows • High load transfer
• MED-stringer runout of fitting • Local bending
• Fatigue-critical fastener holes at stringer and/or fitting
A5-8
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 5
Figure 5-15 Rib-to-Skin Attachments (MSD/MED)
Typical skin
cracking
Typical
cracking -l!:;;::::-t!ii--:>4------·(r:
Type and possible location of MSD and MED Service or test experience of factors that
influence MSD and MED (examples)
• MSD-critical fasteners in skin along rib
attachments • Manufacturing defect-prestress due to
assembly sequence
• MED-critical rib feet in multiple stringer
bays (particularly for empennage under • Sonic fatigue (empennage)
sonic fatigue)
Figure 5-16 Typical Wing and Empennage Construction (MSD/MED)
Riveted Skin and Stringer Construction (MSD & MED} Integrally Stiffened Skins (MSD}
Drain hole
crack
/
~
..
Fastener
attachment ;(b) k (e) y
··~ Cracks
~t;\~: (e)
; ack ~ Root rib, tank
end, etc.
1
L><::d
(a) Crack~ kin (d)
Inherent fail safe and crack stopper Do not have inherent crack stopper
characteristics characteristics of riveted skin and
stringer construction
• MSD- chordwise cracks link up at
• MSD- Chordwise cracks link up at
a) Rib attachment holes
• MED-
d) Rib attachment holes
b) Drain or vent holes
e) Drain or vent holes
f} Stringer run-outs at root rib or tank
c) Stiffener run-outs at
end rib
root rib or tank end rib
• MED-becomes MSD
A5-9
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
APPENDIX 6
WIDESPREAD FATIGUE DAMAGE EVALUATION
This appendix tells you how to perform a WFD evaluation as part of the overall process for
establishing an LOV. The WFD evaluation may be simple or very complex. The situation will
vary from model to model and area to area on any given airplane structural configuration. The
evaluation of the identified WFD-susceptible structure has two objectives—
 To predict when WFD is likely to occur.
 To establish additional maintenance actions, as necessary, to ensure continued safe
operation of the airplane.
The information contained in this appendix was derived in part from the 1999 and 2003 ARAC
Working Group reports referenced in Appendix 1.
THE EVALUATION
The WFD evaluation of susceptible structure is a process for determining when WFD is likely to
occur in the structure, what maintenance actions might be necessary to prevent it from occurring
before the LOV, and when those maintenance actions should be begun. This evaluation should
be based on service history, test data, fatigue analyses, damage-tolerance analyses, teardown
inspections of high-usage airplanes, or any combination of these.
1. Predicting When WFD is Likely to Occur.
a. Characterization of Events Leading to WFD. The fatigue process that leads to
WFD is shown in Figure 6-1. This figure is applicable both to damage that occurs in
multiple sites (multiple site damage) and damage that occurs in similar structure at more
than one location (multiple element damage). For any susceptible structural area, it is not a
question of whether WFD will occur—but when it will occur. In Figure 6-1, the “when” is
illustrated by the line titled “WFD (average behavior),” which is the point when, without
intervention, 50 % of the airplanes in a fleet would have experienced WFD in the considered
area. (Note that the probability density function for flight cycles or flight hours to WFD has
been depicted for reference.) The WFD process includes this phase of crack initiation and a
crack growth phase. During the crack initiation phase, which generally spans a long period
of time, there is little or no change in the basic strength capability of the structure. The
actual residual strength curve depicted in Figure 6-1 is flat, and equal to the strength of the
structure in its pristine state. However, at some time after the first small cracks start to
grow, residual strength begins to degrade. Crack growth continues until the capability of the
structure degrades to the point of the minimum strength required by § 25.571(b). In this
context, the line in Figure 6-1 called WFD represents a point when, without
(average behavior)
intervention, 50 % of the airplanes in a fleet fall below the minimum strength requirements
of § 25.571(b).
A6-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
Figure 6-1
MSD/MED Residual Strength Curve
NOTE: No Scale Implied. PROBABILITY DENSITY
Probability Density
For Definition Use Only FUNCTION FOR CYCLES TO
Function for Cycles to
WFD CONDITION
REQUIRED ACTUAL
RESIDUAL RESIDUAL
STRENGTH ~ STRENGTH
....... ../\ ,. .......... ....
.
.
. /\.
..
..
.
"
MSD/MED
CRACK MSD/MED
INITIATION CRACK GROWTH
CRACK LENGTH
FLIGHT CYCLES/HOURS WFD
(AVERAGE BEHAVIOR)
MSD – MULTIPLE SITE DAMAGE
MED – MULTIPLE ELEMENT DAMAGE
A6-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
b. Widespread Fatigue Damage (average behavior). WFD average behavior
should be estimated for each susceptible structural area. Such an estimate may be based on
full-scale fatigue test evidence and analyses at a minimum, and if available, in-service
history. In making this estimate, consider the following:
(1) A complete review of the in-service history of the susceptible areas (including
loads, mission profiles, environment, and operational statistics of the fleet, stated as a
number of accumulated flight cycles or flight hours).
(2) Significant production variants (material, design, assembly method, and any other
change that might affect the fatigue performance of the detail).
(3) Relevant full-scale and component fatigue test data. (See Appendix 1 of AC
25.571-1D for guidelines on full-scale fatigue test evidence, including addressing cracks
found during testing.)
(4) Relevant data from teardown inspections of full-scale and component fatigue test
data, including teardown inspections of high-time airplanes.
(5) Any fractographic analysis available.
The evaluation of test results for the reliable prediction of the time when WFD might occur
in each susceptible area should include appropriate test-to-structure factors (See definition in
Appendix 2 of this AC). The WFD evaluation may be analytically determined, supported by
test or in-service information.
c. Cracking Pattern. Regardless of whether the assessment of WFD average behavior is
based on in-service data, full-scale fatigue test evidence, analyses; or a combination of any
of these, the following should be considered:
(1) Initial cracking scenario. This is the size and extent of multiple location
cracking expected at the initiation of multiple site damage or multiple element
damage. To determine the time to multiple site damage or multiple element damage
initiation you will need empirical data or an assumption of the crack locations and
sequence, plus a fatigue evaluation. Alternatively, analysis can be based on either:
(a) The distribution of equivalent initial flaws as determined from the
regression to zero cycles of flaws found during fatigue testing, teardown
inspections, or both.
(b) The distribution of fatigue cracking determined from relevant fatigue
testing or service experience, or both.
(2) Final cracking scenario. This is an estimate of the size and extent of multiple
location cracking that could cause residual strength to fall to the minimum required
A6-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
level (WFD condition), as shown in Figure 6-1. There are techniques for 3-D elastic-
plastic analysis of such problems; but there are also several alternative test and
analysis approaches that provide acceptable estimates. One such approach is to define
the final cracking scenario as not yet critical—a point in time before the cracking has
developed into the WFD condition. An example of a multiple site damage problem
would be the occurrence of the first crack link-up in a row of fastener holes. An
example of a multiple element damage problem would be simultaneous cracking of
two or three adjacent structural elements. Using a sub-critical scenario reduces the
complexity of the analysis and, in many cases, will not greatly reduce the estimate of
the total time to WFD because the majority of the total time is generally
(average behavior)
associated with crack initiation.
(3) Crack growth. Progression of the crack distributions from the initial cracking
scenario to the final cracking scenario should be developed. You can develop crack
growth predictions in two ways—
(a) Analytically: typically based on linear elastic fracture mechanics; or
(b) Empirically: from test or service fractographic data.
(4) Differences between multiple site damage and multiple element
damage. We expect details of the approach used to characterize events leading up to
WFD to be different. The differences will depend on whether you are considering
multiple site damage or multiple element damage. This is especially true for crack
interaction.
(a) Crack Interaction. Multiple site damage has the potential for strong
crack interaction, and the effect of multiple cracks on each other needs to be
addressed. Multiple element damage, in most cases, does not have the same
potential for strong crack interaction. The differences between interaction
effects for multiple site damage and multiple element damage are illustrated in
Figure 6-2.
A6-4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
Figure 6-2
Difference between MSD and MED Interaction Effects
S ·· i · n ·· g le crack ... ····· N (cycles ) Single
N (cycles )
~· ··\.
;/ M
c
u
ra
lt
c
ip
ks
le
crack
Mul tiple .. ...
cracks
.. .
a (mm) a (mm)
..................... DB D
Single crack
- B B B
Multiple cracks
D D
MSD MED
A6-5
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
(b) Multiple Site Damage and multiple element damage interaction.
Some areas of an airplane are potentially susceptible to both multiple site damage
and multiple element damage. Simultaneous occurrence of multiple site damage
and multiple element damage is possible, even though it’s not common. A
comparison of inspection start points or modification start points might indicate the
possibility of this occurring. If so, your evaluation should consider interaction
between multiple site damage and multiple element damage.
(5) Multiple Site Damage. When you are assessing multiple site damage, certain
assumptions or methods may have a greater impact than others on the final outcome of
the WFD evaluation.8 The following items were found to have such an impact:
(a) The flaw sizes assumed at initiation of the crack growth phase of analysis.
(b) Material properties used (static, fatigue, fracture mechanics).
(c) Ligament9 failure criteria.
(d) Crack growth equations used.
(e) Statistics used to evaluate fatigue behavior of the structure (e.g., time to crack
initiation).
(f) Methods of determining the structural modification point (SMP).
(g) Detectable flaw size assumed.
(h) Initial distribution of flaws.
(i) Factors used to determine lower-bound behavior as opposed to mean behavior.
(6) Multiple Element Damage. When considering multiple element damage in your
evaluation, you need not consider interaction between cracks in different elements. You
should consider the following:
(a) There is not a high probability that, after a crack initiates in an element, a
second crack will initiate in an element right next to it. If this does happen,
however, the consequences to the overall structure may be severe. This is
because having two structural members fail right next to each other can
completely negate any ability of the structure to tolerate additional damage.
8 “Recommendations for Regulatory Action to Prevent Widespread Fatigue Damage in the Commercial Airplane Fleet,”
Revision A, dated June 29, 1999 (a report of the Airworthiness Assurance Working Group for the Aviation Rulemaking
Advisory Committee’s Transport Aircraft and Engine Issues Group).
9 Ligament is the material between discontinuities in a given structure. Types of discontinuities include holes,
cutouts, or cracks.
A6-6
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
Consequently, when performing your evaluation, you should make conservative
assumptions and assume failures to be adjacent to each other.
(b) When an element fails completely, the load that has to be redistributed onto
the non-failed structure can be large and can have a significant impact on
evaluation results. You should therefore consider the effects of load redistribution
and include it in your evaluation.
2. Establishing Maintenance Actions.
a. Structural Modification Point and Inspection Start Point. Fatigue damage
is the gradual deterioration of a material subjected to repeated loads. This gradual
deterioration is a function of use and can be statistically quantified. The term
widespread fatigue damage is used, and can be statistically quantified, at the end of the
deterioration process—when the structure is no longer able to carry the residual strength
loads. As depicted in Figure 6-1, WFD can never be absolutely precluded because there
is always some probability, no matter how small, that it will occur. Therefore,
modifying or replacing structure at a pre-determined, analytically-derived time stated in
flight cycles or flight hours, minimizes the probability of having WFD in the fleet.
Modification or replacement is the most reliable method for precluding WFD. The
point at which a modification is undertaken is referred to as the “structural modification
point” (SMP) and it is illustrated in Figure 6-3. The SMP is generally a fraction of the
number representing the point in time when WFD will occur, and should
(average behavior)
result in the same reliability as a successful two-lifetime fatigue test. This level of
reliability for setting the SMP is acceptable if inspections for multiple site damage or
multiple element damage are shown to be effective in detecting cracks. If the
inspections are effective, they must be implemented before the SMP. The
implementation times for these inspections are known as the “inspection start points.”
Repeat inspections are usually necessary to maintain this effectiveness in detecting
cracks. If inspections for multiple site damage or multiple element damage are not
effective in detecting cracks, then SMP should be set at the time of inspection start
point. For the purposes of this AC, an inspection is effective if, when performed by
properly trained maintenance personnel, it will readily detect the damage in question.10
The SMP should minimize the extent of cracking in the susceptible structural area in a
fleet of affected airplanes. In fact, if this point is appropriately determined, a high
percentage of airplanes would not have any multiple site damage or multiple element
damage by the time the SMP is reached.
10 The cracking identified in airworthiness directive (AD) 2002-07-09 is an example of the type of cracking that
MSD inspections are effective in detecting. These cracks grow from the fastener holes in the lower row of the lower
skin panel in such a way that the cracking is readily detectable using non-destructive inspection methods. The
cracking identified in AD 2002-07-08 is an example of places where MSD inspections are not effective. These
cracks grow in the outer surface and between the fastener holes in the lower row of the lower skin panel in such a
way that the cracking is not readily detectable using non-destructive inspection methods. Modification is the only
option to address this type of cracking.
A6-7
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
(1) Structural modification point. The SMP should be established as a point
in time when structure should be modified or replaced to prevent WFD from
occurring. This is typically established by—
 Calculating when WFD would first occur in the structure (predicted
using the WFD ).
(average behavior)
 Setting a time before the predicted occurrence of WFD to perform
modifications or replacements that will prevent it.
(a) As an example, the SMP may be determined by dividing the number
representing the timing of when WFD will occur by a factor of
(average behavior)
2 if there are effective inspections, or by a factor of 3 if inspections are not
effective.
(b) A design approval holder may find that the SMP for a particular
structural area has been exceeded by one or more airplanes in the fleet. In
that case, the design approval holder should evaluate those high-time
airplanes to determine their structural condition and notify the airworthiness
authorities and propose appropriate maintenance actions specific to those
airplanes.
(2) Inspection start point. If an inspection is determined to be effective, you
will need to establish when those inspections should start. This point is illustrated
in Figure 6-1. The start point is determined through a statistical analysis of crack
initiation based on fatigue testing, teardown, or in-service experience of similar
structure. The inspection start point is assumed to be equivalent to a lower-bound
value with a specific probability in the statistical distribution of cracking events.
Alternatively, you may establish an inspection start point by applying appropriate
factors (e.g., dividing by a factor of 3) to the number representing WFD average
behavior.
(3) Inspection interval. The interval between inspections depends on the
detectable crack size and the probability that it will be detected with the specific
inspection method.
(4) Adjustment of SMP. The SMP may be extended or reduced, based on the
following:
(a) Extension of SMP. You can extend the SMP if you can show freedom
from WFD up to the new SMP. The tasks required to extend the SMP may
include any or all of the following:
1 Additional fatigue or residual strength tests, or both, on a full-scale
airplane structure or a full-scale component followed by detailed
inspections and analyses.
A6-8
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
2 Fatigue tests of new structure or structure from in-service airplanes on
a smaller scale than full component tests (i.e., sub-component or panel
tests, or both). If a sub-component test is used, the SMP would be
extended only for that sub-component.
3 Teardown inspections (destructive) on structural components that have
been removed from service.
4 Teardown inspections (non-destructive) accomplished by selected,
limited disassembly and subsequent reassembly of specific areas of high-
time airplanes.
5 Analysis of in-service data (e.g., inspections) from a statistically
significant number of airplanes.
(b) Reduction of SMP. If an inspection program for WFD is in place, and if cracks
are found in the structure during an inspection (or during a modification or
replacement), the SMP should be reevaluated to determine if it provides sufficient
freedom from WFD. If it does not, the point in the life of the airplane at which it is
accomplished should be shortened, and you should revise the existing service
information accordingly.
A6-9
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 6
Figure 6-3
MSD/MED Residual Strength Curve
(Including WFD Inspections)
REDUCTION FROM AVERAGE BEHAVIOR
TO PROVIDE EQUIVALENT PROTECTION
PROBABILITY DENSITY
TO A TWO-LIFETIME FATIGUE TEST
FUNCTION FOR CYCLES
TO WFD CONDITION
REQUIRED ACTUAL
STRENGTH RESIDUAL
RESIDUAL STRENGTH
...... i\
\l
I
I
I
I
I
I I
~ SPECIAL MSD/MED I
I
I I INSPECTIONS I I •!• I I
I
: I < I WFD. , I WFD I WFD I WFD :1111
I
I
NOTE: No Scale Implied. I CRACK LENGTH I a c r a it WFD
For Definition Use Only I I I I
I I ---------! I - --- a d et
ISP MSD/MED SMP WFD
DETECTABLE (AVERAGE BEHAVIOR)
FLIGHT CYCLES/HOURS
A6-10
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 7
APPENDIX 7
EXAMPLE OF HOW TO ESTABLISH AN LOV
This appendix provides a simplified example of how to establish an LOV for a specified airplane
structural configuration. The process for establishing an LOV involves four steps—
Step 1. Identifying a candidate LOV (204.a. of this AC) for the airplane structural
configuration (203).
Step 2. Identifying WFD-susceptible structure (204.b.). For this evaluation example, it
was determined that the airplane structural configuration had six areas with WFD-
susceptible structure.
Step 3. Performing a WFD evaluation of each of the six areas of WFD-susceptible
structure (204.c. and Appendix 6) to determine whether there are inspection start points and
structural modification points for the candidate LOV identified. This allows evaluation of
the candidate LOV.
Figure 7-1, shown below, shows the WFD behavior for one WFD-susceptible area. The
figure also shows three different candidate LOVs. Candidate LOV1 is at a point that occurs
significantly before the WFD line. This LOV won’t require any maintenance
(average behavior)
actions. Candidate LOV2 occurs before the WFD line, but closer to it. As a
(average behavior)
result, inspection will need to start before the LOV. Although candidate LOV3 occurs
before the WFD line, with this LOV the probability of WFD in the fleet is
(average behavior)
unacceptable and an inspection and subsequent modification or replacement is required
before the airplane reaches LOV3. Note that for LOV2 and LOV3, if inspections were
determined to be unreliable, then the SMP would occur at the point on the chart where the
ISP is. Using this example, this decision process needs to be repeated for all six WFD-
susceptible areas.
Evaluate candidate LOVs and results of WFD evaluations for each susceptible area.
A7-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 7
Figure 7-1
Comparison of WFD-Susceptible Structure to Airplane LOV
Candidate Candidate Candidate
LOV1 LOV2 LOV3
Residual Strength
Crack length
ISP SMP
WFD
(Average Behavior)
Flight Cycles/Hours
Step 4. Finalizing the LOV. Once all susceptible areas have been evaluated, the final step
is to determine where to establish the LOV that you will propose for compliance (204.d.).
Figure 7-2 shows the results of the WFD evaluation of the six WFD-susceptible areas. As
shown, there are inspections and modifications or replacements that must be performed over
time to preclude WFD. Any LOV can be valid as long as it is demonstrated that, based on its
inherent fatigue characteristics and any required maintenance actions, the airplane model will
be free from WFD up to the LOV. The example in Figure 7-2 includes three LOVs that
could be proposed for compliance.
 LOV1: Maintenance actions are not required to address WFD.
 LOV2: Inspection and modification or replacement of area four are required to
address WFD.
A7-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 7
 LOV3: The design approval holder may propose an LOV that is greater than LOV2.
However, as shown in Figure 7-2, that would result in more maintenance actions than
identified for LOV2. Operators would be required to perform maintenance actions in
four out of the six WFD-susceptible areas. Areas 1, 2, and 4 would have to be inspected
prior to the LOV. Areas 3 and 5 would be free from WFD maintenance actions. Area 4
would be required to be inspected and modified, and then the modification would be
required to be inspected prior to the LOV. Area 6 would require only modification prior
to reaching the LOV because it was determined that inspections in this area would not be
reliable. Some of the maintenance actions required for the LOV may have already been
issued in a service bulletin and mandated by airworthiness directive. For the rest,
airworthiness directives would need to be issued.
Figure 7-2
Airplane Maintenance Actions
LOV1 LOV2 LOV3
I ' I
I A
i--------,;,~ 1,----_,_ ,----_ _
I !
i--------,-; -;- !- --: -- A
Airplane
I
I
erutcurtS
elbitpecsuS
1
2
3
4
5
6
Line
Time
(Flight Cycles/Hours)
ISP SMP
A7-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
APPENDIX 8—SAMPLE COMPLIANCE PLAN
This appendix provides an example of what the compliance plan required by § 26.21(d) might
look like. It tracks the steps necessary to develop a compliance plan and shows how the AAC
Airplane Company prepares the compliance plan for its AAC1 airplanes. Design approval
holders are not required to use the same format as the one used in this example.
References to compliance/completion/meeting dates are tied to the effective date of the rule, and
some may differ based on the design approval holder’s schedules.
A8-1
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Limit of Validity
Widespread Fatigue Damage
14 CFR Part 26
Compliance Plan
Document No. AAC1-26.21-CP-01
AAC Airplane Company
Airplane Model: AAC1
REVISION X
(DATE)
A8-2
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Table of Contents
I. Design Approval Holder: AAC Airplane Company ......................................
II. Airplane Model Applicability [§ 26.21(a)]......................................................
a. Airplane Model: AAC1 ...........................................................................
b. Airplane Model Description.....................................................................
c. Certification Basis (amendment level for § 25.571) ................................
III. Applicable Part 26 Requirements ................................................................
IV. Airplane Structural Configurations [§ 26.21(b)(1)(i) &(ii)] .............................
V. Establishing Limit of Validity [§ 26.21(b)(1)].................................................
a. Candidate LOV
b. Widespread-Fatigue-Damage-Susceptible Structure .............................
c. WFD Evaluation of Susceptible Structure
d. Finalizing LOV for compliance................................................................
VI. Maintenance Actions and Service Information [§ 26.21(b)(2)] .....................
VII. Airworthiness Limitations Section [§ 26.21(b)(3) &(4)].................................
VIII. Certification Compliance Matrix ...................................................................
IX. Deviations to Guidance Material ..................................................................
X. Compliance Documents and Supporting Data.............................................
XI. Schedule......................................................................................................
XII. Model AAC1 Part 26 Compliance Team ......................................................
XIII. Communication and Coordination Plan .......................................................
XIV. Delegation Plan ...........................................................................................
XV. Operators’ Involvement................................................................................
A8-3
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
List of Tables
Table 1 - List of Applicable Part 26 Regulations.....................................................
Table 2 - Certification Compliance Matrix...............................................................
Table 3 - Compliance Document Summary............................................................
Table 4 - Certification Compliance Team Matrix.....................................................
A8-4
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
I. Design Approval Holder.
If you are preparing the compliance plan for § 26.21 on behalf of a design approval
holder, you must first identify the design approval holder and provide a brief description
of the company’s background as it relates to the certification of transport category
airplane structure.
Example: The AAC Airplane Company (AAC) is a well-established airplane manufacturer that
has been designing and manufacturing airplane model AAC1 and its derivatives since 1965. We
have a long history of optimizing the structural design features of our aircraft. We have
developed the capability and expertise to use state–of- the-art structural analysis tools and
techniques and we have extensive experience in structural analysis, structural validation testing,
and in-service evaluations. We have performed partial teardown of our oldest, retired airplanes
to support structural validation work. We have also developed numerous repairs and
modifications/alterations for our airplanes.
AAC employs a staff of 357 structures engineers responsible for new designs and continued
operational safety for our existing fleet, as well as customer requests. Thirty-two of these
engineers are FAA Designated Engineering Representatives (DER). Internal company oversight
of our DERs is provided by our Regulatory and Government Affairs organization, AAC-001.
II. Airplane Model Applicability [§ 26.21(a)].
a. Airplane Model—Reference the type certificate data sheet.
b. Airplane Model Description—Provide a brief description of all model types.
[At a minimum, provide sufficient information about the product to show part 26
applicability (i.e., maximum takeoff gross weight, date certificated). A sketch of the
model, with different views, may be a way to further describe it.]
Example: The Model AAC1 is a turbine-powered transport category airplane with two wing-
mounted turbine powered engines. The Model AAC1 has a metallic airframe, constructed with
aluminum skin and stringer and frame construction. The Model AAC1 also uses aluminum floor
beams. The wing, the vertical fin, and the horizontal stabilizer all use an aluminum rib spar
configuration.
Only Models AAC1-P2 and AAC1-C are affected by § 26.21. Those two models fit the rule
criteria and are not included in the exception list contained in § 26.21(g). Model AAC1-P1 is not
affected by § 26.21 because of its maximum takeoff gross weight. A summary of all three models
is listed for reference.
A8-5
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
AAC1-P1: Type certificate approved February 8, 1968. This passenger airplane model has
two variations –
(1) A single-class seating configuration with a capacity of 70 passengers
and maximum takeoff gross weight of 72,500 lbs.
(2) A three-class seating configuration with a capacity of 60 passengers
and a maximum takeoff gross weight of 68,000 lbs.
AAC1-P2: Type certificate approved July 12, 1974. This passenger airplane model has a
three-class seating configuration with a capacity of 100 passengers. The maximum
takeoff gross weight is 80,000 lbs.
AAC1-C: Type certificate approved October 4, 1984. This cargo model has a maximum
takeoff gross weight of 95,000 lbs.
c. Certification Basis (amendment level for § 25.571)—identify the certification
basis of the airplane model for § 25.571.
[It may be necessary to provide certification basis information by airplane model,
airplane serial numbers, and by sections of the airplane where appropriate. Some
manufacturers have modified portions of an airplane model on amended type
certification programs, and have different parts of the airplane certified to different
amendment levels of § 25.571 (reference § 21.101 Designation of Applicable
Regulations).]
Example: The Model AAC1 has the following certification basis for § 25.571:
o AAC1-P2—Amendment 25-0. There is a supplemental structural inspection
document for the airplane (Document No. AAC1-P2-SSID) which identifies damage–
tolerance-based inspections. These inspections are based on the guidance in AC 91-
56 and mandated by Airworthiness Directive 88-xx-yy.
o AAC1-C—Amendment 25-54, except Amendment 25-0 for the fuselage from the
forward pressure bulkhead to the aft pressure bulkhead. There is a supplemental
structural inspection document (Document No. AAC1-C-SSID) for the fuselage,
which identifies damage-tolerance-based inspections for that structure. These
inspections are based on AC 91-56 guidance and mandated by Airworthiness
Directive 98-xy-zz.
A8-6
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
III. Applicable Part 26 Requirements.
Identify the applicable part 26 requirements.
A8-7
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Example
Table 1
Relevant Part 26 Requirements
PART 26—CONTINUED AIRWORTHINESS AND SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
FOR TRANSPORT CATEGORY AIRPLANES
Regulation Requirement
26.21 Limit of Validity
26.21(a) Applicability
26.21(b) Limit of validity
26.21(c) Persons who must comply and compliance dates
26.21(d) Compliance plan
26.21(e) Compliance dates for compliance plans
26.21(f) Compliance plan implementation
IV. Airplane Structural Configurations [§ 26.21(b)(1)(i) and (ii)].
Describe the proposed means for defining the airplane structural configurations for each
model’s LOV. The configuration comprises all model variations and derivatives
approved under the type certificate, and any structural modifications or replacements
mandated by airworthiness directives (ADs) as of [insert effective date of the final rule].
Example: AAC proposes to establish a separate LOV for each model variation (passenger
model AAC1-P2 and cargo model AAC1-C). AAC will follow the guidance in AC 120-104 to
identify the structural configurations of each model airplane. The configuration will include the
basic model (including all variations) and all structural modifications and replacements
mandated by AD for that model.
For the airplane structural configuration section of AAC1-P2-WFD and AAC1-C-WFD
documents, AAC will include the following information:
o Overall picture of the airplane with dimensions (span, length, etc.).
o View of each airplane section—wing, fuselage sections, horizontal stabilizer,
vertical stabilizer, etc.—with a description of relevant details. These figures will
also include a definition or identification of airplane sections, airplane zones,
details, dimensions, etc. as necessary to define the locations of structure susceptible
to WFD and such identifiers as body/wing stations, frame/stringer locations, and
door numbers/locations.
A8-8
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
o Identification of airplane structural configurations (by model and dash numbers)
and rationale for grouping airplane models, as applicable, for which the LOV will
apply.
o List of all structural modifications and replacements mandated by airworthiness
directive.
V. Establishing the Limit of Validity [§ 26.21(b)(1)].
Describe the proposed means of compliance for establishing an LOV.
[Once you have defined the airplane structural configuration, you can assess its fatigue
characteristics to determine the LOV for that configuration. The process for establishing
an LOV typically involves four steps—
(1) Identifying a “candidate LOV.”
(2) Identifying WFD-susceptible structure.
(3) Performing a WFD evaluation of all susceptible structure.
(4) Finalizing the LOV.]
Example: AAC proposes to establish one LOV for the passenger model AAC1-P2 and one for the
cargo model AAC1-C. AAC will provide compliance documents AAC1-P2-WFD and
AAC1-C-WFD for the passenger and cargo models respectively. The document for each model will
follow the format of the Model AAC1 maintenance planning data and include—
 An LOV.
 The airplane structural configurations.
 The substantiation data.
 A list of all WFD maintenance actions that support the LOV.
 A proposed binding schedule for developing any service information that has not yet been
issued.
A8-9
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
The substantiation data will include—
 A pictorial definition of each airplane model.
 A list of structure susceptible to WFD.
 The engineering data and analyses used to determine the WFD behavior of structure.
 Inspection start points and structural modification points.
For each affected model, AAC proposes to use the AC 120-104 guidance for establishing the LOV
and developing substantiation data. The proposed means of compliance for identifying and
establishing maintenance actions are further described in section V1 of this compliance plan.
a. Candidate LOV [§ 26.21(b)(1)]—Identify the LOV that is likely to be proposed
for compliance with § 26.21.
[At the beginning of the compliance process, you may have an LOV that is a likely
candidate for a specific airplane model. This candidate LOV may or may not be the
LOV you finally submit to the FAA for approval. Although the rule does not require
that the compliance plan include a candidate LOV, you may elect to include that
information in your compliance plan. The candidate LOV should be based on high-
level technical considerations such as the age and service experience of the fleet as
well as results of previously accomplished fatigue tests and analyses. It may also be
based on economic considerations.]
Example: Candidate LOVs
 AAC1-P2: 35,000 flight cycles and 100,000 flight hours.
 AAC1-C: 30,000 flight cycles and 80,000 flight hours.
b. WFD-Susceptible Structure [§ 26.21(b)(1)]—Describe how you will determine
WFD-susceptible structure and identify that structure.
[You must identify WFD-susceptible structure. Accomplishing this will require
screening of all structural components—both baseline structure and structural
modifications and replacements mandated by airworthiness directive. The list of
WFD-susceptible structure will be a subset of the list of fatigue-critical structure
developed for § 26.43.]
A8-10
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Example: AAC will use the guidance in AC 120-104, Appendix 5, to identify structure
susceptible to WFD. AAC will use the list of fatigue-critical structure identified for § 26.43 as
part of this process. Additionally, AAC will identify WFD-susceptible structure based on
structural details and elements that are repeated over large areas and operated at the same
stress levels [structure susceptible to multiple site damage (MSD) or multiple element damage
(MED)]. AAC will cull out AD-mandated modifications, replacements, and baseline structure
that do not need to be evaluated. The method for culling out structure will be identified in each
model’s compliance documents. AAC will obtain FAA concurrence of this method early in the
compliance process.
For the WFD-susceptible structure section of the AAC1-P2-WFD and AAC1-C-WFD
documents, AAC will include the following information—
 Method for screening structure (including modifications and replacements
mandated by AD) susceptible to WFD.
 Identification of structure susceptible to WFD. AAC will identify susceptible
structure by:
1. Including sketches of the structure with dimensions and details to describe the
structure and identify its location.
2. Summarizing the WFD-susceptible structure in a tabular format by—
 Assigning an identifier to the affected fatigue-critical structure.
 Describing the structure, parts, or element included in that structure.
 Identifying which airplanes or models this information applies to and the
location where WFD would most likely occur.
See Section VI of this compliance plan, Maintenance Actions and Service Information, for
further information on identifying structural details that must be inspected, modified, or
replaced to support the LOV.
The following is an example of the format that AAC will use for identifying WFD-susceptible
structure.
A8-11
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Fatigue- Part Name or Applicability Location
Critical Description
Structure
Part No. 1 Wing – Fuselage AAC1-all Section 44, Zone xxxx
Attachment
Part No. 2 Fuselage Skin Lap AAC1-all Zone yyyy or Body
Part No. 3 Joint xxxx modified AD X modifies SN 1 – Station xx - yy
per AD xxxxxxxx 250
Part No. 4a Aft Pressure Dome – AAC1-all Section 48, Zone aaaa
Lap Splice
Part No. 4b Aft Pressure Dome – Y AAC1-all Section 48, Zone bbbb
Chord
Part No. N – Main Deck Cargo AAC1-C Section 43, Body
NN Door Frames … Station xx – yy
c. WFD Evaluation of Susceptible Structure [§ 26.21(b)(1)]—Describe how
you will evaluate structure for WFD susceptibility and determine the average
behavior of WFD for that structure, as applicable.
[The design approval holder must establish an LOV that corresponds to the period of
time, stated as a number of total accumulated flight cycles or flight hours or both,
during which it is demonstrated that widespread fatigue damage will not occur in the
airplane. This demonstration must include an evaluation of airplane structural
configurations and be supported by test evidence and analysis at a minimum and, if
available, service experience, or service experience and teardown inspection results, of
high-time airplanes of similar structural design, accounting for differences in operating
conditions and procedures.
You must evaluate each susceptible structure to some degree. For some structures,
you may have data such as fatigue tests, analysis, and service experience that
demonstrates that WFD will not occur before an airplane reaches its LOV. If that is
the case, you may not have to go through the process of quantifying the WFD average
behavior for that structure. For other structures, for which you do not have sufficient
data, you will have to do an evaluation.]
Example: AAC will establish an LOV based on AC 120-104 guidance. AAC’s Document AAC1-
26-LOV describes that method, including the engineering data AAC will use to evaluate susceptible
structure and quantify the WFD of that structure.
(average behavior)
A8-12
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Engineering Data
Laboratory fatigue tests. AAC conducted a full-scale fatigue test on the Model AAC1-P1
produced from 1967 to 1970. The fuselage, empennage, landing gear, and wing structure were
tested. AAC has also conducted component-level testing of certain structural elements and
testing of the fuselage for Model AAC1-P2. To support certification of Model AAC1-C to the
damage tolerance requirements of § 25.571, Amendment 25-54, AAC had also previously
conducted additional testing and teardown of some portions of the original test article and the
Model AAC1-P2 fuselage produced from 1981 to 1982 AAC will use all that data now to
determine the WFD average behavior for each susceptible structure, as necessary. AAC will
provide document AAC1-26-TPR, which describes the test procedures and results.
Service Experience. AAC reviewed the in-service history of Model AAC1 structure (all three
models) susceptible to WFD. This review included the evaluation of both positive and negative
findings, and consideration of loads, mission profiles, environmental factors, and fleet
operational statistics. AAC has conducted teardown inspections of certain WFD-susceptible
structure on a high-time Model AAC1-P2 airplane. Some inspections included fractographic
examination of the structure. AAC combined the service history results with test and analysis
data to determine the WFD behavior of structure.
Analysis of Engineering Data
AAC used an analysis approach, based on test and service experience, to determine fatigue,
crack growth rates, and residual strengths of structures and to develop the Model AAC1
continued airworthiness structure inspection/maintenance requirements. AAC used AC 25.571-
1D and AC 91-56 as guidance for developing damage-tolerance inspections. AAC's crack
growth analysis method is based on linear elastic fracture mechanics using tools such as
NASGRO or AFGROW software to determine the time (measured in flight cycles or flight hours)
between a detectable crack size and the critical crack size for each structure evaluated. AAC
will use this information, as well as the guidance in AC 120-104, to evaluate structure
susceptible to WFD to determine if additional maintenance actions are required in order for
airplanes to reach the LOV. The operating loads and loads spectra for these evaluations are
defined in documents AAC1-P2-Loads and AAC1-C-Loads for the passenger and cargo
airplanes respectively.
AAC will conduct additional fatigue and crack growth analyses to fully determine the WFD
behavior of the structure. AAC will use existing and proposed fatigue test results as well as
service experience (both positive and negative findings) to make this determination. The data
will be contained in AAC1-26-TPR. AAC will also use statistical analyses to further evaluate the
WFD behavior of the WFD susceptible structure.
A8-13
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Safety Factors
AAC will apply safety factors to the analyses results to account for any uncertainties in the
analyses and scatter in the data. The safety factors will also reflect AAC’s confidence level in
the engineering data used. AAC will be using extensive service experience in conjunction with
fatigue tests. Early in the compliance process, AAC will obtain FAA Oversight Office
concurrence with the safety factors before applying them to the analyses results. AAC will apply
appropriate safety factors to the analysis to determine what the WFD average behavior is for a
structural component for the airplane model fleet. Based on the results of this task, AAC will
identify inspection start points and structural modification points for the airplane model fleet.
Comparison of WFD-Susceptible Structure to a Candidate LOV
Based on the data available, AAC will determine the time period representing the WFD average
behavior for each structure susceptible to WFD and compare it to the candidate LOV. It may be
found that maintenance actions are required before the airplane reaches the candidate LOV in
order to preclude WFD. When AAC determines that maintenance actions are required, it will—
(1) Assess multiple site damage/multiple element damage inspection reliability
and practicality in relation to detectable size of cracks and probability of detection.
(2) Determine when inspections should start.
(3) Determine inspection intervals.
(4) Determine when modifications or replacements should occur. This process will
determine the maintenance actions necessary for affected airplanes to reach the LOV. AAC
will follow AC 120-104 guidance for setting inspection start points and structural
modification points.
d. Finalizing LOV for compliance [§ 26.21(b)(1)]—Identify factors for
consideration in finalizing the LOV.
[The LOV may be based on factors such as economics or input from operators in
addition to the technical considerations. The design approval holder should identify
those factors being considered.]
Example: Once all susceptible structures have been evaluated and compared to the candidate
LOV, AAC will determine where in the life of the airplane to establish the LOV it will submit for
compliance. AAC will hold meetings—referred to as “Structural Task Group Meetings—with
industry and the authorities to discuss its findings, conclusions, and proposals for compliance
A8-14
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
with § 26.21. AAC will provide the FAA with the meeting schedule early in the compliance
process.
VI. Maintenance Actions and Service Information [§ 26.21(b)(2)].
Describe the proposed method for identifying and developing WFD maintenance actions,
if any.
[If the design approval holder establishes an LOV that relies on maintenance actions,
those maintenance actions must be identified. Service information, which is typically
issued in service bulletins, includes a description of the maintenance actions and the
procedures for accomplishing them. Some of the maintenance actions required for the
LOV may have already been published in a service bulletin and mandated by
airworthiness directive as of January 14, 2011. If an inspection previously mandated by
an AD to address WFD will be used to support the LOV, it should be identified as
necessary to meet the LOV. For the rest, airworthiness directives will need to be issued.]
Example: AAC will use the AC 120-104 guidance, in conjunction with results from an
evaluation of the WFD- susceptible structure, to determine whether maintenance actions
(inspections, modifications, and replacements) are required in order for affected airplanes to
reach the LOV. If maintenance actions are required, AAC will identify them in documents
AAC1-P2-WFD and AAC1-C-WFD. This will include identifying—
 All WFD maintenance actions.
o The structure to be inspected, modified, or replaced. For example, if the aft pressure
dome is identified as WFD-susceptible structure (reference Appendix 5, Figure 5-7),
AAC will identify the structural details of the outer ring splice and the web splices so
that maintenance action can be performed properly.
o The method of inspection, modification, or replacement.
o The inspection start point (the point in time at which to begin inspections) and/or the
structural modification point (the point in time to begin the modification).
o The repeat interval.
 All WFD maintenance actions for which service information has been issued, but ADs
have not been issued.
 All WFD maintenance actions for which service information has not been issued and a
proposed binding schedule for providing the necessary service information to the FAA
for those actions in a timely manner so that ADs can be issued.
A8-15
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
VII. Airworthiness Limitations Section [§ 26.21(b)(3) & (4)].
Describe the means of compliance for revising or creating an Airworthiness Limitations
section in the airplane’s instructions for continued airworthiness, as applicable.
[If an Airworthiness Limitations section does not exist for the airplane model being
considered, the design approval holder must establish one. When you submit the LOV
for compliance with (b)(4), the FAA will be reviewing and approving the revision or
creation of the Airworthiness Limitations section in addition to the LOV, and all
substantiation data.]
Example: AAC has an Airworthiness Limitations section in the instructions for continued
airworthiness for Model AAC1-C, as required by part 25, Amendment 25-54 or later. The
Airworthiness Limitations Section includes reference to the fuselage structure inspections
contained in the supplemental structural inspection document (AAC1-C-SSID) mandated by
airworthiness directive 98-xy-zz. AAC will develop an Airworthiness Limitations section for
Model AAC1-P2, which was originally certified before Amendment 25-54 and therefore does not
have an Airworthiness Limitations section. AAC will also reference in the Airworthiness
Limitations section the supplemental structural inspection document AAC1-P2-SSID mandated
by airworthiness directive 88-xx-yy. The Airworthiness Limitations section for each model will
contain a section that will include the FAA-approved LOV.
In service bulletins, AAC will define the WFD maintenance actions needed to support the LOV.
Although not required, AAC will revise the ALS for each model to include a reference to those
maintenance actions when they are available to be included.
VIII. Certification Compliance Matrix.
Providing a certification compliance matrix would be one way to streamline the review
process. Such a matrix would include each regulation number (paragraph by paragraph),
what it requires, a means of compliance description, and the name of the compliance
document.
Example: [The following example shows only a few of the paragraphs from § 26.21 that a
design approval holder would include in its certification compliance matrix.]
A8-16
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Table 2
Certification Compliance Matrix
26.21—Limit of Validity (LOV)
Means of
Regulation Requirement Compliance(MOC) Compliance Document
Description
Applicability. Except as
provided in paragraph (g) of
this section, this section
applies to transport category,
turbine-powered airplanes
with a maximum takeoff gross
weight greater than 75,000
pounds and a type certificate
AAC Airplane Company
issued after January 1, 1958,
has provided a
regardless of whether the
statement of
maximum takeoff gross
applicability in Section
weight is a result of an
II of this compliance
original type certificate or a
plan. Compliance Plan Document
26.21(a) later design change. This
No. AAC1-26.21-CP-01
section also applies to
AAC Airplane Company
transport category, turbine-
is not a holder or
powered airplanes with a
applicant for any STCs
type certificate issued after
or ATCs for which this
January 1, 1958, if a design
rule is applicable.
change approval for which
application is made after
January 14, 2011, has the
effect of reducing the
maximum takeoff gross
weight from greater than
75,000 pounds to 75,000
pounds or less.
AAC Airplane company
Limit of validity. Each person will follow the MOC
identified in paragraph (c) of provided in AC 120- Documents AAC1-P2-WFD,
26.21(b)
this section must comply with 104. Ref Section V of AAC1-C-WFD
the following requirements: this document. See
following for 26.21(b).
Establish a limit of validity of AAC Airplane company DocumentsAAC1-P2-WFD,
26.21(b)(1)
the engineering data that will follow the MOC AAC1-C-WFD,
A8-17
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
supports the structural provided in AC 120- AAC1-26-LOV,
maintenance program 104. Ref Section V of AAC1-26-TPR
(hereafter referred to as LOV) this document.
that corresponds to the period
of time, stated as a number of
total accumulated flight
cycles or flight hours or both,
during which it is
demonstrated that widespread
fatigue damage will not occur
in the airplane. This
demonstration must include
an evaluation of airplane
structural configurations and
be supported by test evidence
and analysis at a minimum
and, if available, service
experience, or service
experience and teardown
inspection results, of high-
time airplanes of similar
structural design, accounting
for differences in operating
conditions and procedures.
The airplane structural
configurations to be
evaluated include—
AAC Airplane company
All model variations and will follow the MOC
DocumentsAAC1-P-WFD,
26.21(b)(1)(i)) derivatives approved under provided in AC 120-
AAC1-C-WFD
the type certificate; and 104. Ref Section IV of
this document.
All structural modifications
and replacements to the
AAC Airplane company
airplane structural
will follow the MOC
configurations specified in DocumentsAAC1-P-WFD,
26.21(b)(1)(ii) provided in AC 120-
paragraph (b)(1)(i), AAC1-C-WFD
104. Ref Section IV of
mandated by airworthiness
this document.
directives as of January 14,
2011.
A8-18
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
IX. Deviations to Guidance Material.
Describe any proposed deviations from any applicable guidance material. The
description should include the proposed alternative means of compliance and rationale.
Example: AAC does not plan on deviating from the guidance provided in AC 120-104.
However, if AAC determines that it may be necessary or appropriate to deviate from this
guidance, AAC will notify the FAA Oversight Office of the deviation, and work with that office to
determine the appropriate course of action.
X. Compliance Documents and Supporting Data.
Identify and summarize the compliance documents and any supporting data. The items
that require FAA approval include—
(1) The compliance plan.
(2) An Airworthiness Limitations section with the LOV incorporated (and
supporting data).
(3) The list of any required maintenance actions not mandated by airworthiness
directives.
(4) A binding schedule for publishing any required service information not yet
published.
Example: AAC will provide the following data/documents to the FAA Oversight Office for
review and approval.
A8-19
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Table 3
Compliance Document Summary
Document Document Title Document Overview Submittal
Date to
Number
[FAA
Oversight
Office]
AAC1-26.21- AAC Models AAC1-P2 Document contains details of how AAC 90 days after
CP-01 and -C: 14 CFR intends to show compliance with the effective date of
26.21(d) Certification applicable section 26.21 requirements. the final rule
Compliance Plan
Document No. WFD Evaluation and Document describes the method for 120 days after
AAC1-26-LOV LOV Methodology determining WFD average behavior, effective date of
demonstrating that WFD will not occur the final rule
before the LOV, establishing maintenance
actions (if applicable), and establishing the
LOV.
Document No. Passenger Model and Documents contain operating loads, loads 18 months after
AAC1-2P- Cargo Model Loads spectra, and assumptions about operational the effective
Loads, Document loading. Documents provide the loads used date of the final
in analyses and tests. rule
AAC1-C-Loads
Draft document
– 60 days
before the 18-
month
compliance
date
Document No. Fatigue Test Document contains fatigue test procedures 18 months after
AAC1-26-TPR Procedures and and reports of the test results, including any the effective
Reports, and Service analysis of the test data. The fatigue tests date of the final
Information will be used either to show freedom from rule
WFD for specific structure or to validate
Draft document
analysis methods. The document also
– 60 days
contains data from service experience,
before the 18-
including analysis of that data.
month
compliance
date
A8-20
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Document Document Title Document Overview Submittal
Date to
Number
[FAA
Oversight
Office]
Document No. AAC Models AAC1- Documents contain: 18 months after
AAC1-P2-WFD, P2, -C: LOV - WFD the effective
o LOV
AAC1-C-WFD, Document date of the final
o Airplane structural configurations rule
o List of all structural modifications and Draft document
replacements mandated by AD – 60 days
before the 18-
o List of all inspections mandated by AD
month
to address WFD
compliance
o Identification of structure susceptible to date
WFD
o WFD evaluation of WFD-susceptible
structure, including
 Identification of engineering data
used in the WFD evaluation
 WFD average behavior for each
WFD-susceptible area or
demonstration that WFD will not
occur before the proposed LOV
 Identification of structural
modification points and inspection
start points, if applicable
o Identification and summary of any
maintenance actions necessary to
support the proposed LOV
o Proposed binding schedule for
completion of service information, if
necessary
Document No. AAC Models AAC1- Documents contain the LOV. For areas 18 months after
AAC1-P2-ALS, P2, -C: Airworthiness certified to Amendment 25-54 or later, the the effective
AAC1-C-ALS, Limitations section of ALS also contains other Instructions for date of the final
the instructions for Continued Airworthiness of the airplane. rule
continued
AAC will update the document to reference
airworthiness
service information (AAC service bulletins)
that describe the WFD maintenance actions
that support the LOV. These actions have
been mandated by AD.
A8-21
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Document Document Title Document Overview Submittal
Date to
Number
[FAA
Oversight
Office]
AAC1-M1 thru AAC Models AAC1- These various documents contain 18 months after
Mxx P2, -C: Maintenance maintenance instructions for the airplane. the effective
Documents for They will reference the applicable LOV and date of the final
xxxxxxxx WFD maintenance actions (AAC service rule
bulletins) as necessary.
AAC1-WFD- AAC Models AAC1- This document provides details on how AAC 90 days after
DIST-02 P2, -C: Distribution intends to make the LOV and WFD effective date of
Method for maintenance actions (AAC service bulletins) the final rule
Instructions for available to owners/operators.
Continued
Airworthiness
ALS- Airworthiness Limitations Section
XI. Schedule.
Identify all major milestones, including the schedule for submitting the LOV, the
schedule for meeting compliance dates, and a schedule for structures task group meetings
if applicable.
Example:
Project Milestones: AAC proposes the following schedule based on FAA AC 26-1 and Order
8110.104:
1. Project kick-off meeting and familiarization briefing: 14 days after effective date.
2. Compliance plan: 90 days after effective date.
3. Meeting to discuss delegation plan: 10 days after compliance plan submittal.
4. Compliance plan approval: 4 weeks after AAC submittal to the FAA.
5. Coordination and technical meeting to discuss AAC WFD evaluation methodology and
operator involvement through structures task group meetings: 100 days after effective date.
6. Submittal of WFD evaluation methodology: 120 days after rule effective date.
7. Coordination and technical meeting to review application of WFD evaluation methodology:
150 days after rule effective date.
A8-22
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
8. Coordination and technical meeting to provide project status update: 6 months after rule
effective date, and every 2 to 4 weeks thereafter, as necessary.
9. Coordination and technical meeting to brief the FAA on draft compliance documents: 90
days prior to 18 months after effective date.
10. Submittal of draft documents with LOV and substantiation data: 60 days prior to the 18-
month compliance date.
11. FAA review of and comments on draft documents: 5 weeks after AAC submittal of draft
documents to FAA.
12. Coordination and technical meeting to discuss with FAA the draft documents: 6 weeks after
AAC submittal of draft documents to the FAA.
13. Submittal of documents for FAA approval: 18 months after rule effective date.
XII. Model AAC1 Part 26 Compliance Team.
Identify the name, organization, position, and roles/responsibilities of part 26 compliance
team members.
Example:
Table 4
Certification Compliance Team Matrix
Name Organization Position Role/Responsibility
Focal for communication with FAA
Oversight Office. e.g., oversees
Regulatory and
correspondence, acts as meeting
Name 1 Government Affairs Regulatory Liaison
coordinator, ensures AAC
AAC-001
compliance with applicable part 26
requirements
Engineering –
Technical focal for development of
Name 2 Commercial Airplanes Engineering Lead
structural ICA
AAC-101
Engineering –
Structures Design Technical focal for design of Models
Name 3 Commercial Airplanes
Engineer AAC1-P2 and AAC1-C
AAC-101
Engineering – Structures Technical focal for structures
Name 4 Commercial Airplanes Maintenance engineering support to maintenance
AAC-101 Engineer department
Maintenance planning department
Structures
Maintenance – focal for development of Models
Maintenance
Name 5 Commercial Airplanes AAC1-P2 and AAC1-C maintenance
Program
AAC-201 programs (including structural
Coordinator
maintenance)
A8-23
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Maintenance – Maintenance
Maintenance department focal for
Name 6 Commercial Airplanes Program Customer
ECA/Customer Relations
AAC-201 Liaison
XIII. Communication and Coordination Plan.
Describe proposed communication and coordination plan.
Example: Reference AC 26-1 and Order 8110.104. AAC proposes monthly status meetings or
more frequently, if required, with [FAA Oversight Office]. The point of contact for scheduling
these meetings is Name xx, who can be reached at 555-555-5555, or via e-mail at
name.xx@abc.com.
XIV. Delegation Plan.
Describe proposed delegation plan and identify the name, organization, and delegation of
each designee.
Example: AAC is working to obtain authorization for its DERs with delegated functions A3
(Fatigue Analysis) and A12 (Damage Tolerance Evaluations) to support compliance findings
with the applicable Part 26 regulations. We will submit a more detailed delegation plan in the
near future. Our Regulatory Liaison, Name xx, will contact the FAA Oversight Office within 10
business days after submittal of this plan to request a preliminary meeting regarding our
delegation plan.
Name Organization Delegation
Name 1 Engineering – Commercial Airplanes, AAC-101 Structures DER (Design)
Name 2 Engineering – Commercial Airplanes, AAC-101 Structures DER (Analysis)
Name 3 Engineering – Commercial Airplanes, AAC-101 Structures DER (Installations)
Name 4 Maintenance – Commercial Airplanes, AAC-201 Structures DER (Maintenance)
XV. Operators’ Involvement.
Describe the plan to facilitate operator involvement in the design approval holder’s part
26 compliance process.
A8-24
01/10/11 AC 120-104
Appendix 8
Example: AAC will work with operators of Model AAC1 aircraft during the collection of
in-service data as well as the coordination and review of data that AAC will be developing to
support operator compliance with 121.1115 and 129.115. AAC will establish Structures
Task Groups to facilitate operator and regulatory authority comments. These meetings will
be in addition to those identified in Section XI of this document. AAC will provide the
schedule for the STG meetings at the coordination and technical meeting, which is scheduled
for [insert appropriate date].
A8-25
