Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Circular
Administration
Subject: Repair Station Internal Evaluation Date: 2/16/17 AC No: 145-5
Programs
Initiated by: AFS-300 Change: 1
1. PURPOSE OF THIS ADVISORY CIRCULAR (AC). This AC provides information and
guidance material that may be used by repair station certificate holders operating under Title 14
of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 145 to design and implement an Internal
Evaluation Program (IEP). The procedures and practices outlined in this AC can be applied to all
of a repair station’s operations. The contents of this document do not have the force and effect of
law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is intended only to provide
clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or agency policies.
2. PRINCIPAL CHANGES. This change adds information about FAA compliance inspection
results to paragraph 3; replaces the discussion of the Joint Aviation Authorities (JAA) with
information about the European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) in paragraphs 3 and 6;
adds new information regarding FAA resources and assistance for certificate holders to
paragraph 10; replaces the related reading materials in Appendix 3 with new online resources;
and updates terminology and references throughout the document.
PAGE CONTROL CHART
Remove Pages Dated Insert Pages Dated
Pages 1 thru 5 9/27/95 Pages 1 thru 5 2/16/17
Pages 7 thru 20 9/27/95 Pages 6 thru 18 2/16/17
Appendix 1, Page 2 9/27/95 Appendix 1, Page 2 2/16/17
Appendix 2, Pages 2 thru 5 9/27/95 Appendix 2, Pages 2 thru 5 2/16/17
Appendix 3, Pages 1 thru 3 9/27/95 Appendix 3, Page 1 2/16/17
John Barbagallo
Deputy Director, Flight Standards Service
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Advisory
U.S. Department
of Transportation
Federal Aviation Circular
Administration
Subject: Repair Station Internal Evaluation Date: 9/27/95 AC No: 145-5
Programs
Initiated by: AFS-300 Change:
1. PURPOSE OF THIS ADVISORY CIRCULAR (AC). This AC provides information and
guidance material that may be used by repair station certificate holders operating under Title 14
of the Code of Federal Regulations (14 CFR) part 145 to design and implement an Internal
Evaluation Program (IEP). The procedures and practices outlined in this AC can be applied to all
of a repair station’s operations. There is no regulatory requirement for an IEP; however, the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) encourages such a program to increase the awareness of
management and all employees of their responsibility to promote continuous compliance with all
regulatory requirements and good operating practices. Establishing the type of program
described in this document is completely voluntary. The contents of this document do not have
the force and effect of law and are not meant to bind the public in any way. This document is
intended only to provide clarity to the public regarding existing requirements under the law or
agency policies.
2. RELATED READING MATERIAL. A list of additional information that may be useful in
understanding and implementing an IEP can be found in Appendix 3, Information to Locate
Related Reading Materials.
3. BACKGROUND. Although safety in air transportation is a responsibility shared by
certificate holders and the FAA, the ways in which this responsibility is discharged differ. While
the FAA monitors certificate holders’ compliance through periodic inspections, the certificate
holders clearly have a superior vantage point in monitoring their own performance and have
greater resources to do so than the FAA. Although the FAA provides standards and guidance and
promotes compliance through its surveillance, enforcement, and other programs, it is the
certificate holders upon whom rests the primary and ultimate responsibility to verify that their
operations are continuously in compliance with all regulatory requirements. Because certificate
holders are in the best position to identify deficiencies and promptly correct them, it is to their
advantage to have a procedure in place whereby they monitor compliance and continuously
improve their compliance posture. Internal reviews will improve the certificate holder’s ability to
identify and correct compliance problems in a more timely manner. There are many ways to
quickly identify and correct problems. One of the methods that has evolved over the past
few years, primarily used by the air carrier industry, is called internal evaluation.
a. Development of the IEP. The concept of an internal evaluation, as defined by the FAA,
was developed in the late 1980s as part of several FAA initiatives to improve the partnership
between the FAA and the air carrier industry.
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
(1) At that time, the FAA considered making an IEP a regulatory requirement.
This contemplated regulation would have instituted a process whereby an air carrier’s
management would be more directly responsible for not only complying with 14 CFR, but also
having a system to continuously verify that operations were in compliance with 14 CFR, instead
of relying on the FAA to do such verification through its surveillance. The FAA decided it was
premature to develop a regulatory requirement. However, the FAA considered the concept to be
sound and believed that voluntary IEPs should be strongly encouraged.
(2) Encouragement came in the form of meetings with industry representatives to explain
the concept and discuss how the FAA could support such a voluntary program.
In February 1992, the FAA published the Air Carrier Internal Evaluation Model Program Guide
to provide additional guidance to the air carrier industry and to FAA inspectors on the
implementation of IEPs for different types of air carrier operations.
b. Related Programs. The IEP is closely related to two other programs of interest to many
certificated repair stations.
(1) The first program is the FAA voluntary disclosure policy. Under this policy,
implemented for repair stations on May 20, 1994, if a repair station finds a potential violation of
14 CFR, reports it to the FAA, and meets other specific conditions, the FAA will not pursue an
enforcement action.
(a) An IEP is an effective method for discovering potential violations and developing
corrective actions that are aimed at permanently eliminating the underlying cause of a problem.
Corrective actions of this type are one of the requirements of the voluntary disclosure program.
(b) Even though the internal evaluation process supports voluntary disclosures, it is
not necessary to have an IEP to participate in the voluntary disclosure program, nor is it
necessary to voluntarily disclose any findings from an internal evaluation. Although the
two programs work well together, they can be mutually exclusive.
(2) The second related program is the quality system required by the European Union
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) for organizations holding EASA Part-145 approval.
c. FAA Compliance Inspections Results.
(1) The responsible Flight Standards offices regularly conduct inspections of repair
stations as a part of their surveillance work programs. Results of these inspections and routine
surveillance indicate that there are recurring areas of noncompliance that would not have
occurred as frequently, or at all, if IEPs had been implemented. These areas may include:
(a) Failure to maintain and follow a quality control (QC) system as required by
part 145, § 145.211.
(b) Failure to maintain and use the equipment, materials, and data required by
§ 145.109.
(c) Inadequate or noncurrent personnel records required by § 145.161.
Par 3 Page 2
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
(d) Performing work for which the repair station is not authorized (§ 145.201).
(e) Failure to follow the requirements contained in § 145.215 when utilizing a
capability list.
(2) While an IEP will not eliminate all instances of noncompliance with the regulations,
it will provide the certificate holder with a better overview of the organization, systems, and
procedures that may, in fact, reveal systemic weaknesses or a lack of sufficient management
controls. These weaknesses represent the potential for noncompliance; consequently, identifying
them in a systematic manner will often permit corrective action before a noncompliance situation
occurs.
4. DEFINITIONS. The following definitions apply to the discussion in this AC and may not be
the same as similar terms used in other documents or applications.
a. Audit. A methodical, planned examination of processes, records, and transactions to
verify compliance with a specific audit criterion. Inspections are normally a part of an audit.
Results are primarily presented in terms of findings and concerns. Auditing measures against a
defined standard, but does not analyze the standard.
b. Concern. A conclusion concerning a system or process that identifies a condition that
may become a finding or a system weakness, which could be the underlying cause of a future
noncompliance situation. A concern is not, at the time of the examination, an example of
noncompliance with a standard. If so, it would be a finding.
c. Control. A key procedure, responsibility, or decision-making position within an
organization or functional area. Effective controls reduce the probability of action contrary to
established requirements and reduce the adverse consequences of such actions should they occur.
The controls used in all phases of the repair station’s operations should receive the majority of
the attention from the internal evaluation.
d. Evaluation. An examination and evaluation of all aspects of a process, both positive and
negative, that includes a review of standards, if appropriate. An evaluation is a process designed
to take a larger view of an operation or organization than an audit. An audit is a subset of an
evaluation. Results of evaluations are presented in terms of findings, concerns, observations,
and recommendations.
e. Finding. A conclusion, supported by evidence, that there has been or is a process or
product that is not in compliance with an established standard.
f. Inspection. A critical examination of an event or object for conformance with a standard.
Results of inspections are reported only in terms of findings.
g. Internal Evaluation. A comprehensive, continual monitoring process that is initiated and
managed by the repair station, even though the personnel actually conducting various audits as
part of the evaluation program may be internal or external to the repair station. The objective of
this process is to promote attitudes and procedures that build quality into a product rather than
depending on corrections of deficiencies to meet quality goals.
Par 3 Page 3
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
h. Observation. A noteworthy feature of a system or procedure. The feature noted is
usually a positive or commendable aspect that should be brought to the attention of management
to ensure that the feature is preserved and perhaps adopted in other places, if appropriate.
i. Recommendation. A specific suggested action that addresses a deficiency (either a
finding or a concern). A recommendation from an internal evaluation team should be analyzed
to determine if it should be adopted. Correction of deficiencies should be the responsibility of the
affected organization.
j. Top Management. A certificate holder’s chief executive officer (CEO), chief operating
officer (COO), president, or a person in an equivalent position who has the authority to resolve
issues and take action and can be held accountable for quality issues. The FAA believes that
top management should be well aware of the plans, results (findings, concerns, and
observations), and followup actions undertaken in an IEP.
5. PROGRAM FEATURES. Internal evaluations should be part of an overall IEP that has
written descriptions of the key elements of the program. The program should have a structured
and planned series of evaluations that are designed to improve the quality of all steps and
functions in the process that lead to a final repair station product.
a. Understanding the Basic Features. An IEP is:
(1) A Systems-Oriented Process. A continual process that incorporates the techniques
of inspections, audits, and evaluations to assess the adequacy of managerial controls and
processes in critical systems and to continuously improve those systems based upon the results of
regular evaluations.
(2) More Than an Audit. A review that extends beyond regulatory compliance to
determine the causes of deficiencies and detect needed enhancements to company operating
practices before deficiencies occur. An IEP would normally verify compliance with company
procedures, policies, and sound business practices, as well as legal requirements.
(3) A Corrective Process. A process that analyzes deficiencies, develops corrective
action plans (CAP) to correct deficiencies, and performs followup evaluations to verify that those
corrections have taken place and have been effective.
(4) A Program with High-Level Attention. An independent process that
organizationally has straight-line reporting responsibility to top management.
(5) An Additional Quality Assurance (QA) Process. The IEP should not be
misunderstood as a program that replaces existing regulatory requirements, such as the QC
system described in § 145.211. It is comprehensive and includes identifying corrective actions,
verifying that those actions have taken place, and ensuring that problems do not reoccur.
Further, one of the most critical aspects of an IEP is the regular day-to-day involvement of
top management, which typically distinguishes it from the normal repair station inspection
functions.
Par 4 Page 4
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
b. Broad Applicability. The internal evaluation should cover all systems, processes,
and products that are basic parts of the repair station’s activities. There is no set list of items to
be covered since each operation is unique, but a representative list of areas to evaluate would
include:
(1) Facilities and equipment.
(2) Repair station authority and limitations versus actual practice, including controls over
any deviation authority.
(3) Personnel qualifications, training, and staffing levels.
(4) Manuals and airworthiness data.
(5) Continuity of work and supervision during personnel changes.
(6) Supplier selection, approval, and surveillance.
(7) Parts and materials handling.
(8) Inspection and QC processes.
(9) Tool adequacy and calibration.
(10) Maintenance release process.
(11) Defect reporting.
(12) Records and recordkeeping procedures.
c. Potential Benefits. An effective IEP may bring benefits to repair stations that go beyond
regulatory compliance. The discipline, structure, and added oversight afforded an organization
through internal evaluation can provide better management information and controls, leading to
increased efficiency.
6. IEP DESCRIPTION. The following are essential elements of an IEP. Each of these should
be described in a program document.
a. Independent and Well-Defined Responsibility. As a part of identifying internal
evaluation responsibility and independence, certificate holders should identify resources and
personnel to conduct the IEP, and they should describe their organizational independence within
the company in light of their internal evaluation functions. Individuals conducting internal
evaluations should not be responsible for accomplishing or managing work in the areas being
evaluated or the tasks being reviewed. This concept may have to be modified for some very
small operations.
(1) For some certificate holders, the size of the operation may justify the costs associated
with having full-time, dedicated resources, and personnel in a separate internal evaluation
department. However, when full-time, dedicated resources and personnel are not practical,
Par 5 Page 5
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
procedures should be established so that any persons having direct responsibility for the areas to
be evaluated are not involved in the selection of the evaluation team.
(2) At very small operations, a reasonable IEP might consist of developing checklists and
a schedule (monthly, quarterly, semiannual, or annual) for accomplishing checklist items.
Even in such cases, the review should include a written statement acknowledging the completion
of the checklist items and the signature of a top management official. Under these conditions,
occasional independent oversight of checklist item development and accomplishment should
be considered.
(3) Certificate holders that use outside resources in support of, or to accomplish, an IEP
should show that use of those outside resources is coordinated through a chain of command that
reflects independence and contact with top management.
(4) A certificate holder’s IEP document should identify the person and/or group within
the organization who has the responsibility and authority to:
(a) Perform or cause to be performed evaluations, audits, and inspections as a part of
an ongoing IEP.
(b) Identify and record any findings or concerns and the evidence necessary to
substantiate those findings or concerns.
(c) Recommend or assist with the development of solutions to findings or concerns.
(d) Verify the implementation of solutions consistent with the action plan and
validate that solutions work.
(e) Communicate and coordinate activities with FAA personnel on a regular basis.
(5) A senior level management representative should accept the responsibility to ensure
that an IEP is properly established, implemented, and maintained. Further, this individual should
have the authority to see that appropriate corrective actions are implemented in a timely manner.
This management position should be above the level that directly supervises work
accomplishment or procedural development and should have direct contact with the CEO
or equivalent. For smaller certificate holders, it is appropriate that this person be the CEO,
president, or equivalent.
b. Top Management Involvement and Accountability. To be effective, an IEP must have
the attention of top management regularly, not just when the program is initiated. Top
management should review internal evaluation results to verify that satisfactory corrective
actions have been implemented.
c. A Continual, Structured Process. In order to effectively anticipate potential
problem areas and correct them before actual findings occur, an IEP should be a continual,
ongoing function. An internal evaluation is intended to be more than spot-check inspections of
Par 6 Page 6
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
operating practices. Of and by themselves, spot-check inspections will do little more than
identify symptoms of potential problems.
(1) A continual process is needed to verify whether findings are isolated instances or
actual symptoms of policy, procedural, or managerial problems. A continual program should
include scheduled evaluations, followup evaluations as necessary, and special evaluations when
trends are identified.
(2) Having a well-structured program ensures that all areas of operations are covered at
appropriate intervals. It also institutionalizes the process so that a change in personnel does not
adversely affect the program.
d. A Plan for Scheduling Evaluations. It is essential for a repair station’s IEP to include a
defined schedule of activities. This planned schedule will serve to verify that the IEP is
comprehensive, well controlled, and timely. A published schedule also provides a vehicle for
keeping management informed. A proper internal evaluation schedule should include a planned
cycle for periodically reviewing areas specified to be covered by the certificate holder’s IEP.
However, the scheduling process should also be dynamic and allow for special evaluations when
trends are identified. In addition, followup evaluations should be scheduled as necessary to
verify that corrective action commitments were met and that they were effective in eliminating
any reported findings or concerns. Planned, special, and followup evaluations, all of which
comprise an effective internal evaluation schedule, are further described below.
(1) Planned Cycle. An effective program will establish a schedule of events that will be
performed during a set calendar period under the IEP. All key areas will be reviewed at least
once each year. It is helpful to divide the complete schedule into segments that are practical from
the workload standpoint. However, it is important to schedule evaluations to allow enough
flexibility for resources to be committed to special evaluations or followup evaluations,
if needed.
(2) Special Evaluations. Conduct special evaluations based on concerns or priorities set
by top management. The need for special evaluations can be driven by such factors as a review
of industry trends, FAA concerns, or identified internal adverse trends.
(3) Followup Evaluations. Schedule and conduct followup evaluations to ensure that
corrective action commitments were met, to verify that corrective actions (described in
subparagraph 6e) were effective, and to review steps taken as a result of FAA surveillance
findings.
e. CAPs. An IEP should include procedures that ensure that CAPs are developed in
response to findings or concerns and for monitoring CAPs to verify their timely and effective
implementation. Internal evaluation personnel should participate in the development of CAPs.
However, organizational responsibility and accountability for the development and
implementation of CAPs should reside with the technical departments cited in the finding
or concern.
Par 6 Page 7
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
(1) A proper CAP should include the following elements:
(a) A detailed description of the finding or concern and how it was discovered.
This should include discussion of the scope and extent of the problem so that candidate solutions
can be analyzed properly.
(b) Analysis of evidence to determine the root cause(s) of the finding or concern.
(c) Identification of planned corrective steps to be taken in response to the finding
or concern.
(d) An implementation schedule, including a timeframe for putting corrective steps
in place.
(e) The individual responsible for implementing each of the corrective steps.
(2) The individuals responsible for managing an IEP should facilitate the corrective
action process by:
(a) Ensuring that CAPs are developed in a timely manner.
(b) Verifying that CAPs include the elements outlined above.
(c) Monitoring implementation of corrective actions.
(d) Providing top management with an independent assessment of CAP development
and implementation.
(e) Initiating scheduled and/or unannounced followup evaluations to ensure the
effectiveness of corrective steps specified in CAPs.
f. Records. The results of an internal evaluation and the review of internal evaluation
information by top management should be documented in reports and other appropriate records,
consistent with the process of internal reporting at the repair station. The repair station should
decide upon the frequency, format, and structure for informing top management of internal
evaluation plans, results, and followup actions. It is recommended that the reporting structure
also be documented by the repair station and become a part of its program plan.
(1) IEP files should include:
• Scheduled evaluation reports;
• Special evaluation reports, including the trends or other reasons for scheduling
a special evaluation;
• CAPs; and
• Results of followup evaluations.
Par 6 Page 8
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
(2) Recognizing that much of the information contained in IEP records could be
proprietary, a repair station should maintain and secure these records on their premises. If given
to the FAA, proprietary information will be protected by the FAA in accordance with applicable
laws and regulations.
(3) Sharing IEP information with the FAA at the repair station offices can enhance the
working relationship between the FAA and the repair station. Information not required by
regulation that remains on the repair station’s property would not normally be subject to public
disclosure.
g. Specialized Training and Experience for Evaluators. The evaluators that are used by
the repair station should have training in the specific procedures used by the repair station.
(1) Evaluators should be trained and experienced specifically with the evaluation of
quality systems. General inspection experience only is usually insufficient.
(2) The internal evaluation concept emphasizes the analysis of procedures, systems,
and management controls. It is not another layer of transaction examination and hardware
inspections. Rather than just verifying the work of the inspectors, for example, it analyzes the
inspection system. Consequently, it requires different skills.
7. AUDITING PROCEDURES—EXAMPLE. The basic tool for accomplishing an
evaluation is the audit. An audit provides assurances that an organization’s methods conform to
its requirements, and it assesses the effectiveness of management controls. Audits help answer
the question, “Are the actual practices consistent with the defined standards?” The example
in Figure 1, Internal Evaluation Report—Example, demonstrates internal evaluation procedures
and the use of auditing concepts in the context of a typical repair station function. This example
addresses the procedures and systems for ensuring that all parts used in modifications or repairs
are approved for such use. Additional information on auditing techniques is provided in
Appendix 2, Auditing Techniques. The example demonstrates the need for an evaluator to
understand the complete system and the applicable requirements. It is important to remember
that the use of the word “system” in this discussion refers to all elements that impact a function:
the relevant policies, procedures, management, operating personnel, training, paperwork,
facilities, and equipment.
a. Background. For the purposes of this example, assume that a repair station has an IEP
in place and there are trained evaluators available, either within the company or from outside
sources. As part of an ongoing series of audits, a small team of evaluators has initiated a review
of the systems that the repair station uses to control its parts supply and ensure that only correct
(approved) parts are used in any of its work. The objective of this internal evaluation task is to
verify that the repair station has the proper procedures, personnel are properly trained, and the
management controls are functioning so that unapproved parts will not be used. It is not simply
a spot inspection of parts and/or the related paperwork to see if any unapproved parts can
be found.
Par 6 Page 9
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
b. Process. For most internal evaluation tasks, including this example, the basic steps are
as follows.
(1) Step 1: Understanding the System. The processes that could affect parts usage in
this repair station include the establishment of policy, the documentation of procedures,
the ordering system, the receiving inspection process, parts storage and tracking, parts selection
by the mechanic, and feedback on the performance of parts. Each of these processes should be
reviewed by internal evaluators. To illustrate the concept, the parts ordering and receiving
inspection processes will be discussed. The types of questions that should be asked to help
understand this system are illustrated below. Note that this is not a comprehensive list, but only
examples of the types of questions that should be on the checklist. For the most part,
the questions are oriented toward systems, procedures, and responsibilities rather than toward
the inspection of parts.
(a) What written policy exists? Who is responsible for developing that policy?
How is complete dissemination of the policy ensured?
(b) Where are the purchasing procedures found? Who is responsible for them and for
seeing that they are followed? Who is responsible for parts selection when ordering?
Are automatic reorder quantities periodically audited?
(c) How does the repair station identify approved sources of parts? Is there some
form of supplier surveillance? How are rotables tracked when they are at another repair station?
(d) What are the receiving inspection procedures with regard to parts? Who is
responsible for these procedures? How are the procedures updated when necessary?
(e) How do receiving inspections personnel know about the policy and procedures?
If there is a change, what is in place to be sure the change is known by all inspectors?
(f) How are parts stored and traced in the inventory? If there is a shelf life, how is
it tracked? What happens when a part in stock exceeds its shelf life?
(g) What is the system/procedure for a mechanic to draw a part from stock? Does this
system protect against the selection of an incorrect or unapproved part? Does it work, based on
personnel perceptions?
(2) Step 2: Identifying Controls. Once the evaluators have developed a good
understanding of how the system operates, the next step is to identify the built-in controls that
ensure the system functions in accordance with the certificate holder’s Repair Station Manual
(RSM) and/or Quality Control Manual (QCM) and 14 CFR.
(a) Does a schedule exist to conduct periodic reviews of the repair station’s policy to
ensure that it reflects the actual functions of the repair station? When an item is added or deleted
from the repair station’s capabilities, what procedures are in place to ensure company
documentation is updated?
Par 7 Page 10
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
(b) Do purchase orders above a certain dollar amount require a higher level of
management’s approval?
(c) How do purchasers know whether a source of parts is approved? Does the
repair station have an approved vendor list, and is it periodically updated? Who is responsible for
the list?
(d) Do the shipping and receiving facilities provide segregated areas for incoming
and outgoing serviceable and unserviceable parts?
(e) Do inspection personnel receive training on receiving inspection procedures?
Is the training documented? Do new inspection personnel receive indoctrination training before
conducting receiving inspections?
(f) When inspection procedures are revised, do inspectors complete a record that
indicates they have been made aware of the revision? Is this record reviewed to ensure all
inspectors have received the appropriate information?
(g) Are periodic parts room inventories conducted to ensure that the inventory
tracking system reflects the actual quantities on hand?
(h) Are shelf life sensitive items tracked separately in the computer or other tracking
system? Do parts room personnel conduct periodic reviews of shelf life items and discard any
expired items? Is it clear who is responsible? Is a report that documents the completion of the
shelf life review provided to management? What happens if a shelf life item is found expired?
(i) Is access to the parts room restricted to authorized personnel or may anyone
enter? How is access controlled? Who is responsible for ensuring that access is controlled?
(3) Step 3: Evaluation Controls—Do They Work? An evaluation of whether a
repair station’s controls are properly functioning may require a review of records, inventory lists,
parts documentation, warranty claim records, and an inspection of a sample of parts. Also,
an important part of any verification process is the personnel interviews. If personnel do not
know policies or feel that they are ignored, management controls are not functioning properly.
The following types of questions may be used to conduct this portion of the evaluation.
(a) Does a record exist that indicates that a periodic policy review has been
conducted? Is it complete and up to date? Does a review of the repair station’s procedures
reconcile against the current QCM?
(b) Do high-dollar purchase orders indicate that management approved the purchase
with a signature, initials, etc.?
(c) Do records list how many parts have been returned to vendors because they do not
pass the receiving inspection? Does the current approved vendor list include a revision date?
Par 7 Page 11
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
(d) Do training records and interviews indicate that initial training and receiving
inspection training have been conducted for inspection personnel? Do records indicate that
training was conducted within a reasonable time after each revision of the RSM and/or QCM?
(e) How often are differences discovered between the inventory system and the actual
number of parts on hand? Also, how often are stocks depleted without making a new order?
How often must the repair station order items on an Aircraft on the Ground (AOG) status?
(f) When conducting the shelf life inventory, how often are expired items found?
Do inventory records indicate that these items have been removed from stock and properly
disposed of? If items were found that were substantially beyond limits, is there any
documentation of what action was taken?
(g) How many warranty claims has the repair station been required to adjust in the
past 6 months? How many FAA enforcement actions or letters of investigation has the
repair station experienced in the past 6 months?
(h) Select a sample of parts using statistical sampling procedures (see Appendix 1,
Program Plan Sample Outline). Are the parts properly tagged or otherwise identified?
What paperwork is available to demonstrate that the part is approved?
(4) Step 4: Reporting the Results. Results of an audit generally do not cover positive
items, nor do they recommend actions. Under an IEP, these, along with findings and concerns,
are important elements of the report. Consequently, an evaluation report should include at least
the following:
(a) Scope of the Evaluation. This should include the areas evaluated, personnel
interviewed (in general terms to provide management an indication as to the scope and depth of
the review without violating any confidentiality), records examined, sampling plans, etc.
(b) Results. Descriptions of each finding or observation presented in such a manner
as to indicate the relative importance of each. This will allow responsible personnel to set
priorities for developing responses.
(c) Recommended Corrective Actions. In some cases, there may be more than
one alternative recommended; in others, there may not be sufficient information for the
evaluators to develop a recommendation.
(d) Positive Results. Some might be shared between different units within the
repair station.
(e) Internal Evaluation Report Form. An AC 145-5 evaluation report standard
form should be established. A possible format is shown in Figure 1.
(5) Step 5: Developing CAPs. CAPs should be developed principally by the
organization responsible for implementing the corrective action; however, if the evaluation team
has properly conducted its evaluation, it will have a detailed understanding of the systems and
procedures underlying the problems and should be able to assist with the analysis of alternatives.
Par 7 Page 12
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
The internal evaluation team should ensure that a CAP is developed in a timely manner and
includes all the key elements, particularly when corrective action is to be implemented, and who
is responsible for implementation.
(6) Step 6: Followup Evaluations. To be effective, the IEP should have followup
evaluations any time a significant corrective action is planned. The purpose is twofold:
to confirm that the action has taken place as planned and to verify that the fix has been effective.
If a properly implemented corrective action does not work, new alternatives should be developed
as soon as possible. Keeping management aware of the results of followup evaluations is an
essential part of the program.
FIGURE 1. INTERNAL EVALUATION REPORT—EXAMPLE
Date: September 30, 1994
Evaluation Area: Control of Parts.
Evaluation Objective: Evaluate the procedures and systems for ensuring that all parts used
in modification or repairs are approved for such use.
Evaluator: J. Doe
Method: Management controls identified per attached checklist; 10 percent sample of parts
in the stock room and on the shop floor.
Findings/Concerns:
Findings: No significant findings. Isolated discrepancy resolved.
Concerns: The separation of serviceable and non-serviceable parts is not always clear. Although
the tagging procedures were correct for the sample of parts reviewed, additional physical
separation would increase the controls.
Proposed Actions: Reorganize the parts room to establish a separate area for the parts that are
not serviceable. Consider separating those parts into those that are beyond economic repair and
those awaiting repair or overhaul.
Followup Recommended: Y _X_ N ___, within 6 months after the evaluation.
Report Routing: Director Material, Chief Inspector, Internal Evaluation File.
Par 7 Page 13
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
8. PROGRAM PLAN. The FAA recommends documenting IEP procedures and
responsibilities in a program plan. This paragraph provides suggestions for preparing and
structuring a program plan.
a. Planning Process.
(1) Certificate holders should determine what level of formal program plan development
is consistent with the size and complexity of their operation.
(2) A program plan should describe the duties, AC 145-5 responsibilities, procedures,
and organization of a certificate holder’s IEP. Terms and elements defined in program plans
should be consistent with those outlined in paragraph 4.
(3) Copies of the program plan should be distributed to appropriate company personnel
so that they are aware of IEP procedures. In addition, revisions should be made as necessary to
ensure that the program plan continues to reflect the certificate holder’s current internal
evaluation procedures and organization.
(4) Even if a certificate holder elects to prepare a written program plan or revise an
existing plan, the FAA will not approve or otherwise formally accept program plan contents.
Documenting the procedures and responsibilities associated with any program is considered
good practice. For certificate holders who choose to prepare a program plan, the FAA will be
available to provide assistance, if requested.
b. Plan Structure. A sample outline of a program plan, using the program elements
discussed in this AC, is provided in Appendix 1. This outline should be viewed as a sample of
items that warrant consideration when a certificate holder is designing an IEP. The number of
items addressed and how they are documented will ultimately depend on the complexity of
the operation.
9. ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS. Each repair station is unique with regard to size, ratings,
facilities, personnel resources, and method of operation. Therefore, no single type of structure
will be appropriate for all types of internal evaluation organizations. Three basic types that may
be used are a dedicated internal evaluation department (see Figure 2, Internal Evaluation
Program Model: Dedicated Internal Evaluation Department), a dedicated individual manager and
temporary evaluators (see Figure 3, Internal Evaluation Program Model: Dedicated Individual
Manager and Temporary Evaluators), and a combination of internal and external resources
(see Figure 4, Internal Evaluation Program Model: Combination of Internal and External
Resources). Other organizational structures may also be appropriate. The most critical elements
are an adequate level of independence and a reporting process that ensures an accountable
manager is aware of the evaluation results. It should be emphasized that any of those
organizations must have the support of the highest levels of the company to ensure the
effectiveness of the internal evaluation process.
a. Dedicated Internal Evaluation Department. This model presupposes a large
organization with multiple departments and, perhaps, satellite locations. This department is
responsible for performing periodic, comprehensive evaluations of the entire organization.
The department would report directly to the CEO or COO of the repair station as a staff function,
Par 8 Page 14
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
yet work closely with the operating departments to remain aware of current operating practices
and to provide constant feedback to those departments.
FIGURE 2. INTERNAL EVALUATION PROGRAM MODEL:
DEDICATED INTERNAL EVALUATION DEPARTMENT
b. Dedicated Individual Manager and Temporary Evaluators. This organizational
model has only one individual fully dedicated to the internal evaluation process. Employees from
the various operating departments, usually one from each department, are used as temporary
evaluators. This method conserves personnel resources, yet ensures a continuing IEP using
qualified personnel on a part-time basis. The selected individuals report to the head of internal
evaluation only for the time they participate in the internal evaluation process. This model is
suited to the medium-sized company where a full complement of dedicated internal evaluation
personnel may not be justified.
Par 9 Page 15
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
FIGURE 3. INTERNAL EVALUATION PROGRAM MODEL:
DEDICATED INDIVIDUAL MANAGER AND TEMPORARY EVALUATORS
c. Combination of Internal and External Resources. This model combines the use of
internal and external resources to create a hybrid IEP. At least one company person is designated
as the head of the internal evaluation function either on a full-time or part-time basis. This
individual is supported by a combination of company, personnel, and external experts in the field
to perform periodic comprehensive evaluations on the organization. The external experts may
come from an industry association, a parent company, or a contracted organization. However,
the primary internal resources remain responsible for the results of the evaluations, sharing of
information with the FAA, incorporating needed changes to their ongoing duties, and the
organization’s basic integrity.
Par 9 Page 16
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
FIGURE 4. INTERNAL EVALUATION PROGRAM MODEL: COMBINATION OF
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL RESOURCES
10. FAA RESOURCES AND ASSISTANCE. Although the development and implementation
of repair station IEPs is completely voluntary, the FAA can provide assistance in developing,
implementing, and the continuing operation of the program.
a. Principal Inspector (PI)-Provided Resources for Certificate Holders. Certificate
holders should contact their PI. The PI can provide information on available resources, including
data from various FAA databases. Internal FAA and/or privacy policies may limit the availability
of some resources, particularly those of an automated nature. However, certain generic data may
be helpful in identifying trends and suggesting areas that may warrant additional focus.
b. FAA-Provided Resources for PIs. Coordination through the PI will ensure appropriate
consideration of each request for information or assistance made by the certificate holder. The PI
may also request assistance from the responsible Flight Standards office or Office of Safety
Standards, as required. Relevant training may be available through the FAA Academy (AMA),
located at the Mike Monroney Aeronautical Center (MMAC) in Oklahoma City, OK.
11. CONCLUSION. Development of IEPs, as discussed in this AC, should help the company to
ensure that company policies and procedures are responsive to growth and change and
continually comply with appropriate safety requirements. Furthermore, the FAA strongly
encourages certificate holders to make IEPs an integral part of their everyday management
process and take full advantage of the voluntary disclosure policy. Aviation safety is best served
by programs that allow certificate holders to identify and correct instances of noncompliance
and invest more resources in efforts to preclude their recurrence, rather than pay civil penalties
after noncompliance.
Par 9 Page 17
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
12. WHERE YOU CAN FIND THIS AC. You can find this AC on the FAA’s website at
https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars.
13. AC FEEDBACK FORM. For your convenience, the AC Feedback Form is the last page of
this AC. Note any deficiencies found, clarifications needed, or suggested improvements
regarding the contents of this AC on the Feedback Form.
Par 12 Page 18
9/27/95 AC 145-5
Appendix 1
APPENDIX 1. PROGRAM PLAN SAMPLE OUTLINE
The following is an outline of a typical Internal Evaluation Program (IEP) plan, with brief
descriptions of each main subject area.
1. OBJECTIVE AND POLICY. The objective should be a statement that clearly defines
the purpose and structure of the repair station’s IEP. Policy statements following the objective
should indicate that the corporate view of the program is that it is independent, that it actively
involves top management, and that it is an ongoing process designed to identify potential
problem areas.
2. DEFINITION OF TERMS. Terms that will be used consistently in the IEP should
be defined. For example, a repair station should have a procedure for categorizing results
(e.g., a finding or concern). If desired, there can also be a scheme for ordering findings so that
management can quickly identify the ones that have the most serious consequences. These
categories, as well as other terms applicable to the internal evaluation function, should be clearly
defined and documented so that company personnel can understand and properly interpret them.
3. DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The duties and responsibilities of internal evaluation
personnel should be documented.
a. The repair station should specify which personnel are responsible for performing the
following tasks:
(1) Supervising the internal evaluation function.
(2) Developing evaluation schedules.
(3) Performing evaluations, audits, and inspections as a part of internal evaluation.
(4) Identifying and recording any findings or concerns.
(5) Collecting the evidence necessary to substantiate findings or concerns.
(6) Initiating, recommending, or providing solutions to problems.
(7) Monitoring the development and implementation of corrective action plans (CAP).
(8) Maintaining and updating internal evaluation files.
(9) Verifying the implementation of solutions.
(10) Coordinating IEP activities with FAA personnel.
b. This section of the program plan should show that personnel responsible for the tasks
listed above are independent of company procedural development and work accomplishment that
would be subject to evaluations. The supervisor of the internal evaluation function should either
be from top management or have straight-line reporting authority to top management.
Page 1
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Appendix 1
c. When full-time dedicated resources are not practical, developed procedures should show
that persons having direct responsibility for the areas to be evaluated are not involved in the
selection or supervision of the internal evaluation team, nor are they involved in any evaluation
functions. In addition, it is highly desirable to have temporary evaluation personnel exempt from
other duties and completely dedicated to the IEP.
4. ORGANIZATION CHART. An organization chart that clearly shows the position of the
internal evaluation function in the repair station’s organization should be prepared. This position
should reflect both the program’s independence within the corporate structure and straight-line
reporting to top management.
5. REPORTING PROCEDURES. Reporting procedures should show that top management
will be informed through straight-line reporting channels about the schedule, plans, results,
and followup actions of the IEP. The procedures outlined in this section of the program plan
should specify the frequency, format, and structure for reporting information to top management.
A procedure should also be developed that explains how the review by top management will
be documented.
6. SPECIFIED AREAS COVERED. A certificate holder should specify the areas that are
within the scope of review under the IEP. The FAA believes that the most effective IEP will
encompass a complete review of all of the repair station’s technical operations. However,
a repair station may elect to limit the evaluations to only a part of the technical operations, and it
may elect to include nontechnical functions that are not subject to Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) requirements. Also, the repair station may elect to phase in an IEP with
limited coverage for an initial period and expanded coverage in later phases.
7. SCHEDULE PROCESS. The scheduling process should be comprised of the following
elements:
a. Scheduled evaluations over a predetermined calendar period.
b. Special evaluations when trends are identified or priorities are set by top management.
c. Followup evaluations to verify the effectiveness of CAPs or in response to findings.
d. The program plan should include procedures for planning, developing, and coordinating
the internal evaluation schedule. The responsibility for planning and developing schedule
activities should also be defined.
8. RECORDS. The IEP should have a defined recordkeeping process. Procedures should
specify how records are filed and maintained. Standard forms or formats for filing reports should
also be specified. The following is a suggested list of records that should be maintained:
a. Scheduled evaluation reports.
b. Special evaluation reports.
c. Followup evaluation reports.
Page 2
9/27/95 AC 145-5
Appendix 1
d. Responses to findings or concerns contained in reports.
e. CAPs submitted in response to findings.
9. TRAINING. If feasible, the repair station should specify that evaluators receive some type
of training in quality auditing and evaluation principles, and systems analysis techniques. This
training could be from any one or combination of the following:
a. In-house training course or on-the-job training (OJT).
b. College courses.
c. Home study course materials.
d. Industry seminars and workshops.
Page 3
9/27/95 AC 145-5
Appendix 2
APPENDIX 2. AUDITING TECHNIQUES
1. PURPOSE. This appendix reviews some of the standard auditing techniques that would
apply to evaluations conducted under a repair station Internal Evaluation Program (IEP).
2. INTRODUCTION. Every organization establishes plans, objectives, and a method for
translating objectives into actions. This is generally accomplished through the development of
policies, systems, and procedures.
a. Policies are decisions; systems and procedures are the methods for carrying out decisions.
Hence, establishing and maintaining effective policies, systems, and procedures are ways of
controlling the activities of an organization.
b. Whatever an organization’s functional activities, some method of review or appraisal is
necessary to compare accomplishments with intended policies, systems, and procedures.
Examples of poor products may be the result of a breakdown in procedures, lack of supervision,
or insufficient management standards.
3. AUDIT PROGRAM. A management audit program is defined by its areas of examination.
In any management audit, the critical areas for review are:
a. Organization. How the area under appraisal is organized and how the actual
organization compares to the stated company organization.
b. Policies. What policies exist and how effective are those policies? Such a review should
also include a determination of how policies support compliance with applicable laws and
regulations.
c. Systems and Procedures. What systems and procedures exist and what possible defects
or irregularities exist?
d. Controls. What system controls exist and are they adequate and effective?
4. SYSTEMATIC AUDIT PROCEDURES. A systematic audit method is based upon
accepted auditing practices, so that those relying on the auditing program can be confident that
results are accurate.
a. The main steps in auditing are the planning, implementation, and reporting phases. In the
planning stage, the scope and objectives of an audit are determined by the needs of the client
(in conjunction with auditors) along with the timing for the initiation and completion of the audit.
Auditors are selected based on individual qualifications and the scope of the task. Work
assignments for the auditors are determined. Entities within an organization are notified of a
pending audit. The audit team makes a preliminary assessment of the established system
(e.g., controls, procedures, systems, and documentary evidence) within the area to be audited.
Checklists for the audit area are developed and a schedule for conducting the audit is determined.
b. Evidence is gathered via review of documents, observations, records checks, and
interviews with key individuals in the areas under review. Detailed checklists are used to ensure
Page 1
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Appendix 2
that all areas of interest are covered. Auditors are careful to keep a record of auditor activities,
including the times and dates for completing an audit activity. In that way, audit results can
generally be reproduced, and the status of work completed and still to be accomplished is
constantly known.
c. The evidence developed during an audit may be portrayed as findings or concerns.
Upon completion of an audit, results are presented to relevant management before a written
report is developed.
d. In the reporting phase of the audit, a written report on audit results is prepared, including
information that can help the user of the report to take appropriate corrective actions. A written
report generally will include a description of the purpose and scope of the audit, details of the
audit activity, audit results, and supporting evidence.
5. APPLYING AUDITING TECHNIQUES TO INTERNAL EVALUATION. The
following discussion provides an overview of the four fundamental steps suggested when
conducting an audit under an IEP.
a. Identify Key System Characteristics: Understanding the Requirements. As a first
step, an evaluator preparing an audit program needs to be cognizant of external requirements and
other factors that may impact management’s decisions. Obvious examples of such external
influences within the aviation environment include:
(1) Regulations.
(2) FAA guidance and policy.
(3) Equipment manufacturer guidance and specifications.
(4) Industry trends or incidents.
(5) An effective audit program includes provisions to verify that appropriate external
influences are recognized in the management structure. An evaluator should use current FAA
programs and materials (available through the local Flight Standards District Office (FSDO)) to
ensure that the audit program addresses all appropriate external requirements and other factors.
(6) An internal evaluation should normally go beyond merely verifying compliance with
the regulations and other applicable legal standards. A thorough program will be designed to
determine and evaluate how an organization’s policies, practices, systems, and procedures
account for and incorporate all external and internal requirements. Therefore, the evaluator must
know how to translate pertinent requirements into key system characteristics.
(7) For example, 14 CFR part 145, § 145.161 states that a certificate holder must keep
certain records pertaining to management, supervisory, and inspection personnel. A compliance
audit would simply ensure that copies of personnel qualification records are maintained.
The results either confirm compliance or noncompliance at the point and time of the audit,
but provide no assurance that compliance will exist each day unless, of course, such an audit is
done every day.
Page 2
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Appendix 2
(8) Like a compliance audit, an internal evaluation will also verify that qualification
records are maintained in accordance with § 145.161. However, because internal evaluation is
a management audit, the first step becomes identifying how this external requirement is managed
within the personnel qualification process. In other words, an evaluator should recognize that the
recordkeeping system is a key characteristic of the personnel qualification process.
(9) The personnel qualification process should include a series of controls that monitor
and verify the retention of personnel qualification records. The evaluator needs to verify that
management has designed the personnel qualification process to include such controls. An audit
of personnel records should not begin until the existence of these controls has been verified.
b. Identifying System Controls: Use of the Checklist.
(1) The second step of the internal evaluation process involves translating the
understanding of key system characteristics into a method for identifying system controls,
which are inherent management features that ensure that internal and external requirements
are fulfilled.
(2) A key technique for the evaluator to accomplish this step is through the development
of a checklist. On the simplest level, a checklist denotes points to be checked. More importantly,
checklists help evaluators and auditors determine the correct order in which to proceed with
an evaluation. A checklist supplements an evaluator’s memory and provides the basis for
reconstructing an audit trail.
c. Criteria Checklist.
(1) One important form of checklist is the “criteria” checklist. A criteria checklist verifies
compliance with a standard, regulation, or called-for procedure. In essence, a criteria checklist
question is the transposition of a standard, regulation, or procedural requirement into a question.
(2) For example, § 145.211 requires repair stations to prepare and keep current a Quality
Control Manual (QCM) containing inspection procedures. A criteria checklist question of such
a requirement asks, “Does the certificate holder maintain a current Quality Control Manual?”
Standards, requirements, etc., often have subsets of standards. A criteria checklist, therefore,
needs to address individual subsets of a particular standard. Each manual required by § 145.211
includes a number of required subsets, such as explaining the internal inspection system, stating
the preliminary inspection procedures, and describing the continuity of inspection responsibility.
Such subsets must be determined and made part of the criteria checklist when assessing
a standard.
d. Departmental Checklist.
(1) Another type of checklist, sometimes referred to as a “departmental” checklist,
structures questions according to discrete departments and/or tasks. Such checklists define the
organization, resources, equipment (if any), and/or tasks, and ask questions such as:
• What is the personnel level required for this department or tasks?
• Are sufficient personnel available to perform the task or departmental function?
Page 3
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Appendix 2
(2) For example, a “departmental” checklist for the evaluation of a repair station’s
incoming materials inspection process will ask questions such as:
• Who receives incoming parts and materials?
• Is the received part invoice compared to the purchase order?
• What procedure ensures that high priority parts are handled quickly and carefully?
e. Differences Between the Criteria and Departmental Checklist.
(1) As demonstrated from the above discussion, a departmental checklist goes beyond
verifying that an organization complies with required criteria. A departmental checklist identifies
the existence of controls within a given area to guide the accomplishment of external
requirements and to meet internal plans and objectives.
(2) For example, recordkeeping should be a key characteristic of the personnel
qualification process. A criteria checklist would ask, “Are personnel qualification records kept
current?” A departmental checklist, however, would break down this requirement into a series of
questions designed to identify the existence of controls that will ensure that adequate
recordkeeping methods are a part of the personnel qualification process. For instance, questions
might include:
• Who is responsible for maintaining personnel qualification records?
• What procedure verifies that personnel qualifications records are maintained for
each supervisor? Are these procedures written?
(3) Obtaining answers to these types of questions is a primary part of the internal
evaluation process. They provide indications of how well the organization is managing
compliance. The answers help the evaluator identify areas of potential weakness, and thus
determine best how to allocate audit resources to test the process.
f. Evaluation of Controls—Do They Work? Only after identifying the existence of key
controls should the evaluator actually inspect, observe, or sample the defined audit population.
In this manner, the evaluator not only verifies current compliance, but also evaluates the
effectiveness of identified controls to ensure continuous compliance.
(1) An essential technique for the evaluator to apply during this step is sampling.
A sampling rate of 100 percent would, of course, contribute to a high degree of reliability
and accuracy. Practical considerations such as time and economics, however, often obviate the
desire to sample every item in a population. But faced with 1,000 records of an action, how many
records should an auditor examine before he or she can be reasonably certain that a conclusion
about the records is reliable? Tables to guide sample size selection are readily available.
(2) Table 1, Table of Sample Sizes – Number of Inspections Recommended to Achieve
a 95 Percent Confidence Level, is an example of those used in sampling. This table is part of the
guidance FAA inspectors receive for conducting inspections. This same table is found in
FAA Order 8900.1, Volume 6, Chapter 2, Section 1, Safety Assurance System: General Policies
and Procedures for Part 91K Surveillance.
Page 4
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Appendix 2
TABLE 1. TABLE OF SAMPLE SIZES – NUMBER OF INSPECTIONS
RECOMMENDED TO ACHIEVE A 95 PERCENT CONFIDENCE LEVEL
Population of Homogeneous Group Recommended Number of Inspections
Up to 100 50% (up to 50)
200 40% (80)
400 35% (140)
500 33% (165)
1,000 28% (280)
2,000 16% (322)
3,000 11% (330)
4,000 8.8% (352)
5,000 7.7% (355)
10,000 3.7% (370)
(3) Evaluators should recognize that sampling is only one tool used in an audit.
The sampling table above is used as part of a random sampling process. Random sampling of an
entire population may not be the most effective means to check for a parameter. Samples
supplement, but do not replace, common sense, good judgment, and experience. When combined
with the results of the checklist, deficiencies found in the sample can begin to be evaluated as
either isolated occurrences or signs of control/management weaknesses.
g. Reporting Results. As with any audit, the final stage of an audit performed under the
internal evaluation approach should be the concise reporting of results.
Page 5
2/16/17 AC 145-5 CHG 1
Appendix 3
APPENDIX 3. RELATED READING MATERIALS LOCATION
1. RELATED READING MATERIALS (current editions):
a. European Union Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) Acceptable Means of Compliance
(AMC) and Guidance Material (GM) to Part-145, Maintenance organisation approvals, available
at https://easa.europa.eu/document-library/acceptable-means-of-compliance-and-guidance-
materials/group/part-145---maintenance-organisation-approvals.
b. International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 9000:2005, Quality management
systems—Fundamentals and vocabulary, available at https://ansi.org/.
c. AC 145-9, Guide for Developing and Evaluating Repair Station and Quality Control
Manuals, available at https://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/advisory_circulars/.
Page 1
Advisory Circular Feedback Form
If you find an error in this AC, have recommendations for improving it, or have suggestions for
new items/subjects to be added, you may let us know by contacting the Flight Standards
Directives Management Officer at 9-AWA-AFB-120-Directives@faa.gov.
Subject: AC 145-5 CHG 1, Repair Station Internal Evaluation Programs
Date: _____________________
Please check all appropriate line items:
An error (procedural or typographical) has been noted in paragraph ____________
on page _______.
Recommend paragraph _____________ on page __________ be changed as follows:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
In a future change to this AC, please cover the following subject:
(Briefly describe what you want added.)
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
Other comments:
______________________________________________________________________
______________________________________________________________________
I would like to discuss the above. Please contact me.
Submitted by: Date: ______________________
