AC 20-113
DATE 10/22/81
ADVISORY CIRCULAR
DEPARnlEXT Ot' TRAN'SPORTATION'
Federal Aviation Administration
Washington, D.C.
Subject: PII..01' .RU:X::ACJI'IOt..s ANlJ :mcx::1':0lr.n.ES 'ID BE 'J)).RE!t,,i IN ffiEVENTL\JG
AIRCRAFT RECIPRCX:ATING ~INE INIXJC'.rICX~ SYSTEM .AND FUEL &'YSTEM
ICING ffiOBI.E.MS
1. PURFCSE. 'Ibis circular provides information i;ertaining to aircraft engine
aoo
ioouction system icing the use of fuel a::iditives to reduce the hazards of
aircraft cperation that may result from the presence of water aoo ice in aviation
gasoline arx:] aircraft fuel systems.
2. CANCEUATICN. '!his Advisory Circular cancels AC 60-9 aoo 20-92.
3. RELATED READING MATERIAL.
a. Advisory Circular AC 20-24A, 4/1/67, QJalification of Fuels, ll.lbricants,
and Additives.
b. Advisory Circular AC 20-29~, 1/18/72, Use of Aircraft Fuel Anti-Icing
Additives.
c. Advisory Circular 20-73, 4/21/71, Aircraft Ice Protection.
d. National Research Council of Canada, Mechanical Engineeri03 report IR-536,
Aircraft Carburetor Icing Studies, July 1970.
e. Investigation of Icing Characteristics of Typical Light Airplane Engine
Irduction Systems, ~.CA 'IN ~. 1790, February 1949.
f. !cir¥:, - Protection Requirements for Reciprocating Engine Induction
Systems, N\CA Technical Report No. 982, June 1949.
g. Various Aircraft Owners Hardl::xx>ks, provided by the manufacturers.
h. Carburetor Ice in General Aviation, Nl'SB Si;ecial Report AA..C.::-72-1.
Initiated f>v: AWS-140
AC 20-113 10/22/81
4. FACKGROUND/bISCUSSION. Reciprocating engine icing oonditions are a oonstant
source of concern in aircraft q:,erations since they can result in lass of p:>wer
and, if oot eliminated, eventual engine malfunction or failure. The different
types of icing oonditions are dlaracterized as air irrluction system icing and
aircraft fuel system icing. Because of a substantial nunt>er of aircraft accidents
attributed to incidents involving such icing, it is imp:.,rtant for a pilot to know
the kinds of ice formation encountered, and the manner in W"iich each is formed.
5. INDUCTION SYSTEM ICING. Induction system icing may be d1aracterized as
Impact Ice, 'lbrottle Ice, and Fuel Vaporization Ice. Any one, or a a::rnbination of
the three kinds of ioouction icing, can cause a serious lass of p:>wer by
restricting the flow of the fuel/air mixture to the engine a.rrl by interference
with the proper fuel/air ratio. Because irrluction icing accidents can be
prevented by the pilot in virtually all cases, improved pilot awareness,
attention, arrl adherence to recanrreooed procedures srould reduce accidents of this
type.
a. Impact Ice - Im~ct ice is formed by noisture-laden air at temperatures
aoo
below freezing, striking freezing oo elements of the ioouction system W1ich
are at t~ratures of 32° F. or below. Under these con:Htions, ice nay ruild up
on sudl canponents as the air scoops, heat or alternate air valves, intake
am
screens, protrusions in the carburetor. Pilots srould be ~rticularly alert
for such icing when flying in snow, sleet, rain, or clouds, expecially W'len they
see ice forming on the wiooshield or leading ooge of the wings. The ambient
temperature at which iJnE:act ice can be expected to ruild nost rapidly is alx>ut
25° F. , when the supercooled noisture in the air is still in a semiliguid state.
This type of icing affects an engine with fuel injection, as W:!ll as carbureted
enoines. It is usually preferable to u..c::e carburetor heat or alternate air as an
ice prevention means, rather than as a deicier, because fast formin;J ice "4"1ich is
not inrnediately recognized by the pilot may significantly !<:Mer the anount of heat
available from the carburetor heating system. Additionally, to prevent p:,wer lass
from impact ice, it nay be necessary to turn to carburetor heat or alternate air
before the selector valve is frozen fast by the accumulation of ice around it.
When icing conditions are present, it is wise to guard against a serious buildup
before deicing capability is lost. The use of p;irtial heat for ice prevention
without some instrumentation to gauge its effect may be worse than rone at all
under the circumstances. Impact icing is mlikely under extremely cold
am
conditions, because the relative humidity is usually !CM in cold air because
such noisture as is present usually consists of ice crystals which pass through
the air system harmlessly. The use of p:lrtial heat W1en the t~rature is below
32° F. may, for example, raise the mixture temperature up to the danger range,
whereas, full carburetor heat would bring it well above any danger of icing.
b. Throttle Ice - Throttle ice is usually formed at or near a partially
closed throttle, typical of an off-idle or cruise p:>wer setting. This occurs W1en
am
water vapor in the air coooenses freezes because of the cooling restriction
caused by the carburetor venturi aoo the throttle butterfly valve. The rate of
ice accretion within aoo imnediately downstream fran the carburetor venturi am
throttle butterfly valve is a function of the arrount of entrained 1TOisture in the
air. If this icing corx:lition is allowed to continue, the ice may build up until
it effectively throttles the engine. Visible noisture in the air is oot necessary
Par 4
2
10/22/81 AC 2.0-113
for this type icing, oomE:!times making it difficult for the pilot to believe unless
he is fully aware of this icing effect. The effect of throttle icing is a pro­
gressive decline in the i;::ower delivered by the engine. With a fixed pitch
propeller this is evidenced by a loss in engine RP~1 arrl a lass of altitude or
airspeed LD1less the throttle is slowly a::Jvanced. With a constant sr,eed propeller,
there will oormally t:e oo change in RPN but the same decrease in airplane
performance will occur. A decrease in manifold pressure or exhaust gas
temperature will occur before any ooticeable decrease in engine arrl airplane
performance. If these indications are rot noted by the pilot arrl no corrective
action is taken, the decline in engine p::>wer will J:XObably continue progressively
until it becomes necessary to retrim to maintain altitude: am engine roughness
will occur probably followed by back£iring. Beyond this stage, insufficient
power may be available to maintain flight; arrl canplete stoppage may occur,
especially if the throttle is rroved abruptly.
c. Fuel Vaporization Ice - This icing oorxlition usually occurs in oonjunction
with throttle icing. It is rrost prevelant with conventional float type
carburetors, arrl to a lesser degree with pressure carburetors "*1.en the air/fuel
mixture reaches a freezing temperature as a result of the a:x:>ling of the mixture
during the expansion pt"Ocess tnat takes place t:etween the carburetor arrl engine
manifold. This does rot present a problem on systems \llhich inject fuel at a
location beyorxl "*1.ich the passages are kept warm by ergine teat. Thus the
injection of fuel directly into each cylirxler, or air heated by a supercharger,
generally precludes such icing. VaEX)rization icing may occur at temperatures fran
32° F. to as high as 100° F. with a relative humidity of 50 percent or above.
Relative humidity relates the actual water vapor present to that which could be
oresent. Therefore. temperature laroely determines the maximum amount of water
vapor air can told. Since aviation weather reports normally inclooe air
aoo
temperature dewpoint tem{::erature, it is i;::ossible to relate the tem{::erature ­
dewpoint spread to relative humidity. As the spread beccmes less, relative
humidity increases and t:ecomes 100% when temperature and dewpoint are the same.
In general, when the temperature-dewpoint spread reaches 20 ° F. or less, you have
a relative humidity of 50% or higher arrl are in p:>tential icing oonditions.
6. FUEL SYSTEM ICING. Ice formation in the aircraft fuel system results from the
presence of water l.n the fuel system. 'Ihis water may be undissolved or dissolved.
One oorrlition of undissolved water is entrained water W'l.ich consists of minute
water particles susperrled in the fuel. 'Ihis may oc01r as a result of mechanical
agitation -of free water or oonversion of dissolved water through temperature
reduction. Entrained water will settle out in time under static oorrlitions and
may or may not be drained during oormal servicing, de{::erxling on the rate at which
it is oonverted to free water. In general, it is rot likely that all entrained
water can ever be separated frcm fuel Lllder field rorrlitions. The settling rate
deperrls on a series of factors including temperature, quiescence and droplet size.
a. The droplet size will vary deperxliOj upon the medlanics of formation.
Usually, the p:irticles are oo small as to l:e invisible to the naked e:1e, rut in
extreme cases, can cause slight haziness in the fuel. Water in solution cannot be
rerroved except by deyhdration or by converting it through tem:[:erature reduction to
entrained, then to free water.
3
Par 5
AC 20-11.3 10/22/81
b. Another ooooition of undissolved water is free water which may be
introduced as a result of refueling or the settling of entrained water that
oollects at the bottom of a fuel tank. Free water is usually present in easily
detectable quantities at the bottom of the tank, separated by a continuous
interface fron the fuel above. Free water can be drained fron a fuel tank through
the sump drains which are provided for that purpose. Free water frozen on the
bottom of reservoirs, such as the fuel tanks arrl fuel filter, may reooer water
drains useless arrl can later melt releasing the water into the system t:11ereby
causing engine malfunction or stowage. If such a corxiition is detected, the
aircraft may be placed in a warm hangar to reestablish p:-oper draining of tt1ese
reservoirs, arrl all sumps arrl drains s.t:ould be activated arrl d'lecked prior to any
flying. Entrained water (i.e., water in S'.:>lution with Fetroleum fuels)
constitutes a relatively snall :i;:art of the total I,X>tential water in a p:3.rticular
system, the quantity dissolved being dependent on fuel temperature arrl the
existing pressure arrl the water s::::>lubility characteristics of the fuel. Entrained
water will freeze in rol<'.t fuel and tend to stay in suspension lorY3er since the
specific gravity of ice is approximately the same as that of aviation gasoline.
c. Water in suspension ,my freeze and form ice crystals of sufficient size
such that fuel screens, strainers, arrl filters may be blocked. sane of tnis water
may be cooled further when the fuel enters carburetor air faSSages arrl causes
carburetor rretering canp:ment icing, when corr.litions are oot otherwise C'Ol"Xlucive
to this form of icing.
7. mEVENI'IOO PRCX:EDURES.
a. Induction System Icing - '.I'o pt:event accidents due to irrluction system
1c1ng, the pilot should regularly use heat under oonditions known to be oorrlucive
to atmospheric icing arrl be alert at all times for irrlications of icing in the
fuel system. The following precautions and procedures will terrl to reduce the
likelihood of ioouction system icing problems:
(1) Periodically d'leck the carburetor heat systems arrl oontrols for
proper oondition arrl q:,eration.
(2) Start the ergine with the carburetor heat control in the CDW
y;:osition to avoid p:;,ssible damage to the system an::! a fire hetzard because of a
backfire \\bile starting.
(3) As a preflight item, check the carburetor heat effectiveness by
noting the J;X)'t>ler drop (when heat is applied) on runup.
(4) wnen the relative humidity is above 50 percent arrl the tem~rature ic;
below 70 ° F., apply carburetor heat briefly immediately before takeoff,
particularly with float type carburetors, to remove any ice whicn rray have been
accumulated during taxi arrl runup. Generally, the use of carburetor heat for
taxiing is oot recommerrled because of p::>ssible irY3estion of foreign rratter on s::>rne
installations which have the unfiltered air a:lmitted witn tne control in the HO!'
or ALTERNI\TE AIR I,X>Sitions.
Par 6
4
AC 20-113
10/22/81
( 5) Conduct takeoff without carburetor heat, unless extreme intake ici03
conditions are present.
(6) Remain alert for irrlications of irrluction system icing during takeoff
and clinb-out, especially when the relative humidity is above 50 percent, or \o.hen
visible roisture is present in the atmosphere.
(7) With instrumentation such as carburetor or mixture temperature
gauges, pa.rtial heat sl'x>uld te used to keep tne intake temperature in a safe
range. Witoout such instrumentation, full heat stx:>uld be used intermittently as
considered necessary
(8) If irrluction system ice is suspected of causing a p:,wer loss, apply
full heat or alternate air. I):, oot disturb the throttle Ll'ltil improvement is
noted. Expect a further p:>wer loss rromentarily arrl then a rise in i:ower as the
ice is irelted.
(9) If the ice persists after a period with full heat, grc:K:iually c:K:ivance
the throttle to full p:,wer arrl climb at the naximllll rate available to produce as
much heat as p:,ssible. leaning with the mixture control will generally increase
the heat b.Jt sooulrl te used with caution as it may kill the eo;ine under
circumstances in w:1ich a restart is imp:,ssible.
( 10) Avoid clouds as nuch as p:,ssible.
(11) As a last resort, arrl at the risk of catastrophic e03ine damage, a
severely iced engine may oometimes te relieved by irrlucing backfiring with the
mixture control. This is a critical J;Xocedure at best, should oot te attempted
with supercharged en:1ines, arrl rust te done with the carburetor heat control in
the CDLD 'fX>S i tion.
( 12) Heat should l:e applied for a sl'x>rt ti.rte to warm the irrluction 5/stern
before beginning a prolonged descent with the ergine throttled arrl left on durirg
the descent. :Ebwer lever advancement sh:>uld te :E):!rformed periodically during
descent to assure that .c;:ower recovery can l:e achieved. The pilot should be
prepared to turn heat off after fewer is regained to resurne level flight or
initiate a go-arourrl from an abarrloned approach.
( 13) · The pilot sh:>uld remember that irrluction system 1c1ng is El)SSible,
particularly with float type carburetors, with temperatures as high as 100° F.
and the humidity as low as 50 percent. It is rore likely, oowever, with
temperatures below 70 ° F. arrl the relative humidity above 80 percent. The
ana
likelil'x:>od of icing increases as the temperature decreases (down to 32 ° F. ) as
the relative humidity increases.
( 14) General - When oo carburetor air or mixture temperature instrumen­
tation is available, the general practice with smaller engines should te to use
full heat whenever carburetor heat is applied. With higher ootput e03ines,
however, especially those with superchargers, discr~nination in the use of heat
Par 7 5
AC a:}-113 10/22/81
should be exercised tecause of tne i;:ossible engine OV'erheating arrl detonation
hazard involved. In the c.ase of i'.)ressurized aircraft, use of alternate or heated
carburetor air may require depressurization of tne p:1ssenger cnnpartment. pilot
A
of an airplane equipped witt1 a carburetor air or mixture temperature gauge sh:Juld
make it a practice to regulate his carburetor neat by reference to this in:iicator.
In any airplane, the excessive use of heat during full p::,wer operations, such as
takeoffs or anergency go-arounds, may result in serious reduction in the p:>wer
develof,ed, as well as the hazard of engine damage. It stould be noted that
carburetor heat is rarely needed for brief high p,wer q:ierations.
b. Fuel System Icing. The use of anti-icing crlditives for EDl11e piston-engine
p'.)wered aircraft has been approved as a rreans of preventing problen1S witn water
arrl ice in aviation ga&)line. Some laboratory an::i flight testing imicated that
the use of hexylene glycol, certain methanol derivatives arrl ethylene glycol
monanethyl et.her (EGME) in small concentrations inhibit fuel systam icing. These
tests irrlicate that the use of EGME at a maximum 0.15% by volume ooncentration
subztantially inhibits fuel system icing under nost Of)erating corrlitions. The
concentration of crlditives in the fuel is critical. Marked deterioration in
additive effectiveness may result fran too little or too much cdditive.
CAt11'ION: It SX>uld be recognized that the anti-icin.) a::lditive is in m
way a substitute or replacement for carburetor heat. Strict adherence to
operating instructions involving the use of carburetor neat shOuld be
adhered to at all tiJ'Tles when cperating under atm:::>spheric con::Htions
corrlucive to icing.
u. mNCLUSI<l'1S.
a. '!he evidence is clear that carburetor icirY3 arrl aviation gasoline fuel
system icing problems are prevented with proper use of aircraft carburetor air
heat arrl by good oousekeeping to eliminate water from gasoline arrl the aircraft
fuel system.
b. Fuel anti-icing crlditives have been found to have~ beneficial effect on
the prevention of fuel system icing when i:roperly bleooed in the fuel systems of
aircraft :f()Wered by reciprocating en:Jines.
c. Pue! anti-icing crlditives are rot effective in preventing or reducing
carburetor ice under all q::ierating coooitions an::i are oo substitute for tne
necessity of carburetor heat or following prescribed flight rranual cperating
procedures.
d. The effects arrl recx:rnmeooations described in this circular are general in
nature arrl appropriate to rost c:ertificated airplanes. The pilot srould refer to
all available cperating instructions a.rd placards pertaining to his airplane to
determine whe er any ~cial oonsideration or r;:,r-ocedures apply to its q:ieration.
M. c. Beard
Director of Airworthiness
6 'par 7
\~:RIecycled
Recyc1a01e
