0 Advisory
U.S. Department
Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: Change 1 to COMPOSITE Date: August 24, 2010 AC No: 20-107B
AIRCRAFT STRUCTURE Initiated by: AIR-100 Change: 1
1. PURPOSE. This Change corrects minor errors in the original AC. Under paragraph
8a(l)(c)(i), an "or" is changed to "and"; under Figure 3 in paragraph 8a(l)(c), the box for
"Category 3 Damage" is reworded; the definition for "No-Growth Approach" is moved to place
it into correct alphabetical order; and page numbers within Appendix 2 are revised to be correct.
2. CHANGE TEXT. Changed text is indicated by vertical bars in the margins.
PAGE CONTROL CHART
Remove Pages Dated Insert Pages Dated
12 9/8/09 12 8/24/10
13 9/8/09 13 8/24/10
Appendix 2, A2-2 9/8/09 Appendix 2, A2-2 8/24/10
Appendix 2, A2-3 9/8/09 Appendix 2, A2-3 8/24/10
~c:::>~..e--r---­
David W. Hempe
Manager, Aircraft Engineering Division
Aircraft Certification Service
Advisory
U.S. Department
Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
Subject: COMPOSITE AIRCRAFT Date: 9/8/09 AC No: 20-107B
STRUCTURE Initiated by: AIR-100 Change:
1. Purpose of this Advisory Circular (AC). This AC sets forth an acceptable means, but not
the only means of showing compliance with the provisions of Title 14 of the Code of Federal
Regulations (14 CFR) parts 23, 25, 27, and 29 regarding airworthiness type certification
requirements for composite aircraft structures involving fiber reinforced materials, e.g., carbon
and glass fiber reinforced plastics. Guidance information is also presented on the closely related
design, manufacturing, and maintenance aspects. The information contained herein is for
guidance purposes and is not mandatory or regulatory in nature.
2. To Whom this AC Applies. The audience of this AC may include applicants,
certificate/approval holders, parts manufacturers, material suppliers, maintenance, and repair
organizations.
3. Cancellation. AC 20-107A, Composite Aircraft Structure, dated April 25, 1984, is cancelled.
4. Related Regulations and Guidance. The material contained herein applies to normal,
utility, acrobatic, commuter, and transport category aircraft type certificated under Civil Aviation
Regulations (CARs) 3, 4b, 6, 7; and 14 CFR parts 23, 25, 27, 29; and it is produced in
compliance with 14 CFR part 21, §§ 21.125, or 21.143 as may be appropriate. The sections of
14 CFR, parts 23, 25, 27, and 29 applicable to each paragraph of this AC are listed in Appendix
1. Other supporting guidance relevant to the AC is also provided in Appendix 1.
5. General.
a. The procedures outlined in this AC provide guidance material for composite structures,
particularly those that are essential in maintaining the overall flight safety of the aircraft (“critical
structure” as defined in Appendix 2), and are considered acceptable to the FAA for showing
compliance with certification requirements of civil composite aircraft. This circular is published
to aid in the evaluation of certification programs for composite applications and to reflect the
current status of composite technology. It is expected that this circular will be modified
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
periodically to reflect the continued evolution of composite technology and the data collected
from service experience and expanding applications.
b. There are factors unique to the specific composite materials and processes used for a
given application. For example, the environmental sensitivity, anisotropic properties, and
heterogeneous nature of composites can make the determination of structural failure loads,
modes, and locations difficult. The reliability of such evaluation depends on repeatable
structural details created by scaled manufacturing or repair processes. The extent of testing
and/or analysis may differ for a structure depending upon the criticality to flight safety, expected
service usage, the material and processes selected, the design margins, the failure criteria, the
database and experience with similar structures, and on other factors affecting a particular
structure. It is expected that these factors will be considered when interpreting this AC for use
on a specific application.
c. Definitions of terms used in this AC can be found in Appendix 2.
6. Material and Fabrication Development. All composite materials and processes used in
structures are qualified through enough fabrication trials and tests to demonstrate a reproducible
and reliable design. One of the unique features of composite construction is the degree of care
needed in the procurement and processing of composite materials. The final mechanical
behavior of a given composite material may vary greatly depending on the processing methods
employed to fabricate production parts. Special care needs to be taken in controlling both the
materials being procured and how the material is processed once delivered to the fabrication
facility. Regulatory requirements in 14 CFR, parts 2X, §§ 2x.603 and 2x.605 specify the need to
procure and process materials under approved material and process specifications that control the
key parameters governing performance. 14 CFR, parts 2X, §§ 2x.609 and 2x.613 outlines a need
to protect structures against the degradation possible in service. They also require that the design
account for any changes in performance (e.g., environmental and variability effects) permitted by
material and process specifications.
a. Material and Process Control.
(1) Specifications covering material, material processing, and fabrication procedures are
established to ensure a basis for fabricating reproducible and reliable structure. Material
specifications are required to ensure consistent material is being procured, and batch acceptance
testing or statistical process controls are used to ensure material properties do not drift over time.
Specifications covering processing procedures should be developed to ensure that repeatable and
reliable structure is being manufactured. The means of processing qualification and acceptance
tests defined in each material specification should be representative of the expected applicable
manufacturing process. The process parameters for fabricating test specimens should match the
process parameters used in manufacturing actual production parts as closely as possible. Both
test and production parts must conform to material and process specifications.
(2) Once the fabrication processes have been established, changes should not occur
unless additional qualification, including testing of differences is completed (refer to Appendix
Page 2
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
3). It is important to establish processing tolerances; material handling and storage limits; and
key characteristics, which can be measured and tracked to judge part quality.
(3) Material requirements identified in procurement specifications should be based on the
qualification test results for samples produced using the related process specifications.
Qualification data must cover all properties important to the control of materials (composites and
adhesives) and processes used for production of composite structure. Carefully selected
physical, chemical, and mechanical qualification tests are used to demonstrate the formulation,
stiffness, strength, durability, and reliability of materials and processes for aircraft applications.
It is recommended that material suppliers work closely with airframe manufacturers to properly
define material requirements.
(4) To provide an adequate design database, environmental effects on critical properties
of the material systems and associated processes should be established. In addition to testing in
an ambient environment, variables should include extreme service temperature and moisture
content conditions and effects of long-term durability. Qualification tests for environmental
effects and long-term durability are particularly important when evaluating the materials,
processes, and interface issues associated with structural bonding (refer to paragraph 6.c for
related guidance).
(5) Key characteristics and processing parameters will be monitored for in-process
quality control. The overall quality control plan required by the certifying agency should involve
all relevant disciplines, i.e., engineering, manufacturing, and quality control. A reliable quality
control system should be in place to address special engineering requirements that arise in
individual parts or areas as a result of potential failure modes, damage tolerance and flaw growth
requirements, loadings, inspectability, and local sensitivities to manufacture and assembly.
(6) The discrepancies permitted by the specifications should also be substantiated by
analysis supported by test evidence, or tests at the coupon, element or subcomponent level. For
new production methods, repeatable processes should be demonstrated at sufficient structural
scale in a way shown to be consistent with the material and process qualification tests and
development of the associated specifications. This will require integration of the technical issues
associated with product design and manufacturing details prior to a large investment in structural
tests and analysis correlation. It will also ensure the relevance of quality control procedures
defined to control materials and processes as related to the product structural details.
(7) The FAA does not generally certify materials and processes. However, the materials
and processes may be accepted as part of a particular aircraft product certification. Appropriate
credit may be given to organizations using the same materials and processes in similar
applications subject to substantiation and applicability. In some cases, material and processing
information may become part of accepted shared databases used throughout the industry. New
users of shared qualification databases must control the associated materials and processes
through proper use of the related specifications and demonstrate their understanding by
performing equivalency sampling tests for key properties. Materials and processes used in
technical standard order (TSO) articles or authorizations must also be qualified and controlled.
Page 3
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
b. Manufacturing Implementation.
(1) Process specifications and manufacturing documentation are needed to control
composite fabrication and assembly. The environment and cleanliness of facilities are controlled
to a level validated by qualification and proof of structure testing. Raw and ancillary materials
are controlled to specification requirements that are consistent with material and process
qualifications. Parts fabricated meet the production tolerances validated in qualification, design
data development, and proof of structure tests. Some key fabrication process considerations
requiring such control include material handling and storage; laminate layup and bagging (or
other alternate process steps for non-laminated material forms and advanced processes); mating
part dimensional tolerance control; part cure (thermal management); machining and assembly;
cured part inspection and handling procedures; and technician training for specific material,
processes, tooling and equipment.
(2) Thorough manufacturing records are needed to support parts acceptance and
allowable discrepancies (defects, damage and anomalies). Substantiating data is needed to
justify all known defects, damage and anomalies allowed to remain in service without rework or
repair. Manufacturing records are also needed for all substantiated design and process changes.
(3) New suppliers of parts for previously certified aircraft products are qualified by
manufacturing trials and quality assessments to ensure equivalent production and repeatability.
Some destructive inspection of critical structural details is needed for manufacturing flaws that
are not end item inspectable and require process controls to ensure reliable fabrication.
c. Structural Bonding. Bonded structures include multiple interfaces (e.g., composite-to-
composite, composite-to-metal, or metal-to-metal), where at least one of the interfaces requires
additional surface preparation prior to bonding. The general nature of technical parameters that
govern different types of bonded structures are similar. A qualified bonding process is
documented after demonstrating repeatable and reliable processing steps such as surface
preparation. It entails understanding the sensitivity of structural performance based upon
expected variation permitted per the process. Characterization outside the process limits is
recommended to ensure process robustness. In the case of bonding composite interfaces, a
qualified surface preparation of all previously cured substrates is needed to activate their surface
for chemical adhesion. All metal interfaces in a bonded structure also have chemically activated
surfaces created by a qualified preparation process. Many technical issues for bonding require
cross-functional teams for successful applications. Applications require stringent process control
and a thorough substantiation of structural integrity.
(1) Many bond failures and problems in service have been traced to invalid qualifications
or insufficient quality control of production processes. Physical and chemical tests may be used
to control surface preparation, adhesive mixing, viscosity, and cure properties (e.g., density,
degree of cure, glass transition temperature). Lap shear stiffness and strength are common
mechanical tests for adhesive and bond process qualification. Shear tests do not provide a
reliable measure of long-term durability and environmental degradation associated with poor
bonding processes (i.e., lack of adhesion). Some type of peel test has proven more reliable for
evaluating proper adhesion. Without chemical bonding, the so-called condition of a “weak
Page 4
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
bond” exists when the bonded joint is either loaded by peel forces or exposed to the environment
over a long period of time, or both. Adhesion failures, which indicate the lack of chemical
bonding between substrate and adhesive materials, are considered an unacceptable failure mode
in all test types. Material or bond process problems that lead to adhesion failures are solved
before proceeding with qualification tests.
(2) Process specifications are needed to control adhesive bonding in manufacturing and
repair. A “process control mentality,” which includes a combination of in-process inspections
and tests, has proven to be the most reliable means of ensuring the quality of adhesive bonds.
The environment and cleanliness of facilities used for bonding processes are controlled to a level
validated by qualification and proof of structure testing. Adhesives and substrate materials are
controlled to specification requirements that are consistent with material and bond process
qualifications. The bonding processes used for production and repair meet tolerances validated
in qualification, design data development, and proof of structure tests. Some key bond
fabrication process considerations requiring such control include material handling and storage;
bond surface preparation; mating part dimensional tolerance control; adhesive application and
clamp-up pressure; bond line thickness control; bonded part cure (thermal management); cured
part inspection and handling procedures; and bond technician training for specific material,
processes, tooling, and equipment. Bond surface preparation and subsequent handling controls
leading up to the bond assembly and cure must be closely controlled in time and exposure to
environment and contamination.
(3) 14 CFR § 23.573(a) sets forth requirements for substantiating the primary composite
airframe structures, including considerations for damage tolerance, fatigue, and bonded joints.
Although this is a small airplane rule, the same performance standards are normally expected
with transport and rotorcraft category aircraft (via special conditions and issue papers).
(a) For any bonded joint, § 23.573(a)(5) states in part: "the failure of which would
result in catastrophic loss of the airplane, the limit load capacity must be substantiated by one of
the following methods—(i) The maximum disbonds of each bonded joint consistent with the
capability to withstand the loads in paragraph (a)(3) of this section must be determined by
analysis, tests, or both. Disbonds of each bonded joint greater than this must be prevented by
design features; or (ii) Proof testing must be conducted on each production article that will
apply the critical limit design load to each critical bonded joint; or (iii) Repeatable and reliable
non-destructive inspection techniques must be established that ensure the strength of each joint."
(b) These options do not supersede the need for a qualified bonding process and
rigorous quality controls for bonded structures. For example, fail safety implied by the first
option is not intended to provide adequate safety for the systematic problem of a bad bonding
process applied to a fleet of aircraft structures. Instead, it gives fail safety against bonding
problems that may occasionally occur over local areas (e.g., insufficient local bond contact
pressure or contamination). Performing static proof tests to limit load, which is the second
option, may not detect weak bonds requiring environmental exposure and time to degrade
bonded joint strength. This issue should be covered by adequately demonstrating that qualified
bonding materials and processes have long-term environmental durability. Finally, the third
option is open for future advancement and validation of non-destructive inspection (NDI)
Page 5
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
technology to detect weak bonds, which degrade over time and lead to adhesion failures. Such
technology has not been reliably demonstrated at a production scale to date.
(4) Adhesion failures found in production require immediate action to identify the
specific cause and isolate all affected parts and assemblies for disposition. Adhesion failures
discovered in service require immediate action to determine the cause, to isolate the affected
aircraft, and to conduct directed inspection and repair. Depending on the suspected severity of
the bonding problem, immediate action may be required to restore the affected aircraft to an
airworthy condition.
d. Environmental Considerations. Environmental design criteria should be developed that
identify the critical environmental exposures, including humidity and temperature, to which the
material in the application under evaluation may be exposed. Service data (e.g., moisture content
as a function of time in service) can be used to ensure such criteria are realistic. In addition, the
peak temperatures for composite structure installed in close proximity to aircraft systems that
generate thermal energy need to be identified for worst-case normal operation and system failure
cases. Environmental design criteria are not required where existing data demonstrate that no
significant environmental effects, including the effects of temperature and moisture, exist for the
material system and construction details, within the bounds of environmental exposure being
considered.
(1) Experimental evidence should be provided to demonstrate that the material design
values or allowables are attained with a high degree of confidence in the appropriate critical
environmental exposures to be expected in service. It should be realized that the worst case
environment may not be the same for all structural details (e.g., hot wet conditions can be critical
for some failure modes, while cold dry conditions may be worse for others). The effect of the
service environment on static strength, fatigue and stiffness properties and design values should
be determined for the material system through tests; e.g., accelerated environmental tests, or
from applicable service data. The maximum moisture content considered is related to that
possible during the service life, which may be a function of a given part thickness, moisture
diffusion properties and realistic environmental exposures. The effects of environmental cycling
(i.e., moisture and temperature) should be evaluated when the application involves fluctuations
or unique design details not covered in the past. Existing test data may be used where it can be
shown to be directly applicable to the material system, design details, and environmental cycling
conditions characteristic of the application. All accelerated test methods should be
representative of real-time environmental and load exposure. Any factors used for acceleration
that chemically alter the material (e.g., high temperatures that cause post-cure) should be avoided
to ensure behavior representative of real environmental exposures.
(2) Depending on the design configuration, local structural details, and selected
processes, the effects of residual stresses that depend on environment must be addressed (e.g.,
differential thermal expansion of attached parts).
e. Protection of Structure. Weathering, abrasion, erosion, ultraviolet radiation, and
chemical environment (glycol, hydraulic fluid, fuel, cleaning agents, etc.) may cause
deterioration in a composite structure. Suitable protection against and/or consideration of
Page 6
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
degradation in material properties should be provided for conditions expected in service and
demonstrated by test. Where necessary, provide provisions for ventilation and drainage.
Isolation layers are needed at the interfaces between some composite and metal materials to
avoid corrosion (e.g., glass plies may be used to isolate carbon composite layers from
aluminum). In addition, qualification of the special fasteners and installation procedures used for
parts made from composite materials need to address the galvanic corrosion issues, as well as the
potential for damaging the composite (delamination and fiber breakage) in forming the fastener.
f. Design Values. Data used to derive design values must be obtained from stable and
repeatable material, which are procured per a mature material specification and processed per a
representative production process specification. This is done to ensure that the permitted
variability of the production materials is captured in the statistical analysis used to derive the
design values. Design values derived too early in the material’s development stage, before raw
material and composite part production processes have matured, may not satisfy the intent of the
associated rules. Laminated material system design values should be established on the laminate
level by either test of the laminate or by test of the lamina in conjunction with a test validated
analytical method. Similarly, design values for non-laminated material forms and advanced
composite processes must be established at the scale that best represents the material as it
appears in the part or by tests of material substructure in conjunction with a test validated
analytical method.
g. Structural Details. For a specific structural configuration of an individual component
(point design), design values may be established which include the effects of appropriate design
features (holes, joints, etc.). Specific metrics that quantify the severity of composite structural
damage states caused by foreign impact damage threats are needed to perform analysis (i.e., the
equivalent of a metallic crack length). As a result, testing will often be needed to characterize
residual strength, including the structural effects of critical damage location and combined loads.
Different levels of impact damage are generally accommodated by limiting the design strain
levels for ultimate and limit combined load design criteria. In this manner, rational analyses
supported by tests can be established to characterize residual strength for point design details.
7. Proof of Structure – Static. The structural static strength substantiation of a composite
design should consider all critical load cases and associated failure modes. It should also include
effects of environment (including structural residual stresses induced during the fabrication
process), material and process variability, non-detectable defects or any defects that are allowed
by the quality control, manufacturing acceptance criteria, and service damage allowed in
maintenance documents of the end product. The static strength of the composite design should
be demonstrated through a program of component ultimate load tests in the appropriate
environment, unless experience with similar designs, material systems, and loadings is available
to demonstrate the adequacy of the analysis supported by subcomponent, element and coupon
tests, or component tests to accepted lower load levels. The necessary experience to validate an
analysis should include previous component ultimate load tests with similar designs, material
systems, and load cases.
a. The effects of repeated loading and environmental exposure which may result in material
property degradation should be addressed in the static strength evaluation. This can be shown by
Page 7
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
analysis supported by test evidence, by tests at the coupon, element or subcomponent level, as
appropriate, or alternatively by relevant existing data. Earlier discussions in this AC address the
effects of environment on material properties (paragraph 6.d) and protection of structure
(paragraph 6.e). For critical loading conditions, three approaches exist to account for prior
repeated loading and/or environmental exposure in the full scale static test.
(1) In the first approach, the full scale static test should be conducted on structure with
prior repeated loading and conditioned to simulate the critical environmental exposure and then
tested in that environment.
(2) The second approach relies upon coupon, element, and subcomponent test data to
determine the effect of repeated loading and environmental exposure on static strength. The
degradation characterized by these tests should then be accounted for in the full scale static
strength demonstration test (e.g., overload factors), or in analysis of these results (e.g., showing a
positive margin of safety with design values that include the degrading effects of environment
and repeated load).
(3) In practice, aspects of the first two approaches may be combined to get the desired
result (e.g., a full scale static test may be performed at critical operating temperature with a load
factor to account for moisture absorbed over the aircraft structure’s life). Alternate means to
account for environment using validated tests and analyses (e.g., an equivalent temperature
enhancement to account for the effect of moisture without chemically altering the material) may
be proposed by the applicant to the administrator for approval.
b. The strength of the composite structure should be reliably established, incrementally,
through a program of analysis and a series of tests conducted using specimens of varying levels
of complexity. Often referred to in industry as the “building block” approach, these tests and
analyses at the coupon, element, details, and subcomponent levels can be used to address the
issues of variability, environment, structural discontinuity (e.g., joints, cut-outs or other stress
risers), damage, manufacturing defects, and design or process-specific details. Typically, testing
progresses from simple specimens to more complex elements and details over time. This
approach allows the data collected for sufficient analysis correlation and the necessary replicates
to quantify variations occurring at the larger structural scales to be economically obtained. The
lessons learned from initial tests also help avoid early failures in more complex full scale tests,
which are more costly to conduct and often occur later in a certification program schedule.
(1) Figures 1 and 2 provide a conceptual schematic of tests typically included in the
building block approach for fixed wing and rotor blade structures, respectively. The large
quantity of tests needed to provide a statistical basis comes from the lowest levels (coupons and
elements) and the performance of structural details are validated in a lesser number of sub-
component and component tests. Detail and subcomponent tests may be used to validate the
ability of analysis methods to predict local strains and failure modes. Additional statistical
considerations (e.g., repetitive point design testing and/or component overload factors to cover
material and process variability) will be needed when analysis validation is not achieved. The
static strength substantiation program should also consider all critical loading conditions for all
critical structure. This includes an assessment of residual strength and stiffness requirements
Page 8
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
after a predetermined length of service, which takes into account damage and other degradation
due to the service period.
,,
I COMP'o'NENTS I ...
~
' ' T='
' '
V,-<,,
I ' ' I C Q
SUB-COMPONENTS C
\ ~
:'~
,,,~··.
,/, IDETAILSI .· \.._
/ ~
·,·
....
' r=:c-=-=:'=~ '
:' I ELEMENTS I '
'
/ ~1
=
):
~
i)
= ~
1:,r ~ \
' 0
~
• ----• • • • • • ·1couP0Ns1· • • • • • • • • • • ', )>
"'
~
111111 - ..
:'~ ~ mmm IIIllIIID ~ ~ \
------------------------------------------·
Figure 1 - Schematic diagram of building block tests for a fixed wing
.
I
I
~EHTS
!1
I
,
'
Iu ~ :I
---. -- ~
I I
I I DETAILS I I I
I I
I I
I ~ I
I I
,I ------------~
' I I \
EL<M(NTI
I --·2-'e?I\
,[E]
L---------------~ 1
,' I I \ i
C=OUPO NS
I
/ l!fflffl ttmttl l I l I lP M J ! l I l \ I
I \
' I -~-- --~-- - 1 - 1II - D - [ - IlT - I - -~-- - 1? - :Zi - J ! I
Figure 2 - Schematic diagram of building block tests for a tail rotor blade
(2) Successful static strength substantiation of composite structures has traditionally
depended on proper consideration of stress concentrations (e.g., notch sensitivity of details and
impact damage), competing failure modes, and out-of-plane loads. A complete building block
approach to composite structural substantiation addresses most critical structural issues in test
articles with increasing levels of complexity such that many areas of reliable performance can be
demonstrated prior to the component tests. The details and subcomponent testing should
establish failure criteria and account for impact damage in assembled composite structures.
Page 9
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
Component tests are needed to provide the final validation accounting for combined loads and
complex load paths, which include some out-of-plane effects. When using the building block
approach, the critical load cases and associated failure modes would be identified for component
tests using the analytical methods, which are supported by test validation.
c. The component static test may be performed in an ambient atmosphere if the effects of
the environment are reliably predicted by building block tests and are accounted for in the static
test or in the analysis of the results of the static test.
d. The static test articles should be fabricated and assembled in accordance with production
specifications and processes so that the test articles are representative of production structure
including defects consistent with the limits established by manufacturing acceptance criteria.
e. The material and processing variability of the composite structure should be considered
in the static strength substantiation. This is primarily achieved by establishing sufficient process
and quality controls to manufacture structure and reliably substantiate the required strength by
test and analysis. The scatter in strength properties due to variability in materials and processes
are characterized by proper allowables or design values, which are derived in compliance with
14 CFR § 2x.613. When the detail, subcomponent and component tests show that local strains
are adequately predicted, and positive margins of safety exist using a validated analysis
everywhere on the structure, then proof of static strength is said to be substantiated using
analysis supported by test evidence. Alternatively, in the absence of sufficient building block
test data and analysis validation, overloads are needed in the component test to gain proof of
static strength for the structure using an approach referred to as substantiated by tests. The
overload factors applied in this case need to be substantiated either through tests or past
experience and must account for the expected material and process variation.
f. It should be shown that impact damage that can be likely expected from manufacturing
and service, but not more than the established threshold of detectability for the selected
inspection procedure, will not reduce the structural strength below ultimate load capability. This
can be shown by analysis supported by test evidence, or by a combination of tests at the coupon,
element, subcomponent, and component levels. The realistic test assessment of impact damage
requires proper consideration of the structural details and boundary conditions. When using a
visual inspection procedure, the likely impact damage at the threshold of reliable detection has
been called barely visible impact damage (BVID). Selection of impact sites for static strength
substantiation should consider the criticality of the local structural detail, and the ability to
inspect a location. The size and shape of impactors used for static strength substantiation should
be consistent with likely impact damage scenarios that may go undetected for the life of an
aircraft. Note that it is possible for some designs to have detectable impact damage and still
meet static strength loads and other requirements without repair (refer to allowable damage
discussions in paragraph 10.c.(1)).
g. Major material and process changes on existing certified structure require additional
static strength substantiation (e.g., refer to Appendix 3).
Page 10
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
8. Proof of Structure – Fatigue and Damage Tolerance. The evaluation of composite
structure should be based on the applicable requirements of 14 CFR §§ 23.573(a), 25.571,
27.571, and 29.571. Such evaluation must show that catastrophic failure due to fatigue,
environmental effects, manufacturing defects, or accidental damage will be avoided throughout
the operational life of the aircraft. The nature and extent of analysis or tests on complete
structures and/or portions of the primary structure will depend upon applicable previous
fatigue/damage tolerant designs, construction, tests, and service experience on similar structures.
In the absence of experience with similar designs, FAA-approved structural development tests of
components, subcomponents, and elements should be performed (following the same principles
discussed in paragraph 7.b and Appendix 3). The following considerations are unique to the use
of composite material systems and provide guidance for the method of substantiation selected by
the applicant. When establishing details for the damage tolerance and fatigue evaluation,
attention should be given to a thorough damage threat assessment, geometry, inspectability, good
design practice, and the types of damage/degradation of the structure under consideration.
 Composite damage tolerance and fatigue performance is strongly dependent on
structural design details (e.g., skin laminate stacking sequence, stringer or frame
spacing, stiffening element attachment details, damage arrestment features, and
structural redundancy).
 Composite damage tolerance and fatigue evaluations require substantiation in
component tests unless experience with similar designs, material systems, and
loadings is available to demonstrate the adequacy of the analysis supported by
coupons, elements, and subcomponent tests.
 Final static strength, fatigue, and damage tolerance substantiation may be gained in
testing a single component test article if sufficient building block test evidence exists
to ensure that the selected sequence of repeated and static loading yield results
representative of service or provide a conservative evaluation.
 Peak repeated loads are needed to practically demonstrate the fatigue and damage
tolerance of composite aircraft structure in a limited number of component tests. As a
result, metal structures present in the test article generally require additional
consideration and testing. The information contained in AC 25.571-1 provides
fatigue and damage tolerance guidance for metallic structures.
a. Damage Tolerance Evaluation.
(1) Damage tolerance evaluation starts with identification of structure whose failure
would reduce the structural integrity of the aircraft. A damage threat assessment must be
performed for the structure to determine possible locations, types, and sizes of damage
considering fatigue, environmental effects, intrinsic flaws, and foreign object impact or other
accidental damage (including discrete source) that may occur during manufacture, operation or
maintenance.
Page 11
8/24/10 AC 20-107B
(a) There currently are very few industry standards that outline the critical damage
threats for particular composite structural applications with enough detail to establish the
necessary design criteria or test and analysis protocol for complete damage tolerance evaluation.
In the absence of standards, it is the responsibility of individual applicants to perform the
necessary development tasks to establish such data in support of product substantiation. Some
factors to consider in development of a damage threat assessment for a particular composite
structure include part function, location on the airplane, past service data, accidental damage
threats, environmental exposure, impact damage resistance, durability of assembled structural
details (e.g., long-term durability of bolted and bonded joints), adjacent system interface (e.g.,
potential overheating or other threats associated with system failure), and anomalous service or
maintenance handling events that can overload or damage the part. As related to the damage
threat assessment and maintenance procedures for a given structure, the damage tolerance
capability and ability to inspect for known damage threats should be developed.
(b) Foreign object impact is a concern for most composite structures, requiring
attention in the damage threat assessment. This is needed to identify impact damage severity and
detectability for design and maintenance. It should include any available damage data collected
from service plus an impact survey. An impact survey consists of impact tests performed with
representative structure, which is subjected to boundary conditions characteristic of the real
structure. Many different impact scenarios and locations should be considered in the survey,
which has a goal of identifying the most critical impacts possible (i.e., those causing the most
serious damage but are least detectable). When simulating accidental impact damage at
representative energy levels, blunt or sharp impactors of different sizes and shapes should be
selected to cause the most critical and least detectable damage, according to the load conditions
(e.g., tension, compression or shear). Until sufficient service experience exists to make good
engineering judgments on energy and impactor variables, impact surveys should consider a wide
range of conceivable impacts, including runway or ground debris, hail, tool drops, and vehicle
collisions. This consideration is important to the assumptions needed for use of probabilistic
damage threat assessments in defining design criteria, inspection methods, and repeat inspection
intervals for maintenance. Service data collected over time can better define impact surveys and
design criteria for subsequent products, as well as establish more rational inspection intervals and
maintenance practice. In review of such information, it should be realized that the most severe
and critical impact damages, which are still possible, may not be part of the service database.
(c) Once a damage threat assessment is completed, various damage types can be
classified into five categories of damage as described below (refer to figure 3). These categories
of damage are used for communication purposes in this AC. Other categories of damage, which
help outline a specific path to fatigue and damage tolerance substantiation, may be used by
applicants in agreement with the regulatory authorities.
(i) Category 1: Allowable damage that may go undetected by scheduled or
directed field inspection and allowable manufacturing defects. Structural substantiation for
Category 1 damage includes demonstration of a reliable service life, while retaining ultimate
load capability. By definition, such damage is subjected to the requirements and guidance
associated with paragraph 7 of this AC. Some examples of Category 1 damage include BVID
and allowable defects caused in manufacturing or service (e.g., small delamination, porosity,
Page 12
8/24/10 AC 20-107B
small scratches, gouges, and minor environmental damage) that have substantiation data showing
ultimate load is retained for the life of an aircraft structure.
Category 1 Damage:
BVID, Allowed Mfg. damage
Category 2 Damage:
VID, damage requiring repair per
Ultimate normal inspection process
Design Category 3 Damage:
1.5 Factor
Load Obvious damage found within a
Level of Safety few flights of occurrence,
Limit requiring immediate repair
~ Maximum load Category 4 Damage:
per lifetime Discrete source damage,
obvious to flight crew,
Continued
requiring repair after flight
safe flight
Allowable Critical Damage
Damage Limit Threshold Category 5 Damage:
(ADL) (CDT) Anomalous damage not covered in
______ I design but known to operations,
Increasing Damage Severity requiring immediate repair
Figure 3 - Schematic diagram of design load levels versus categories of damage severity
(ii) Category 2: Damage that can be reliably detected by scheduled or
directed field inspections performed at specified intervals. Structural substantiation for Category
2 damage includes demonstration of a reliable inspection method and interval while retaining
loads above limit load capability. The residual strength for a given Category 2 damage may
depend on the chosen inspection interval and method of inspection. Some examples of Category
2 damage include visible impact damage (VID), VID (ranging in size from small to large), deep
gouges or scratches, manufacturing mistakes not evident in the factory, detectable delamination
or debonding, and major local heat or environmental degradation that will sustain sufficient
residual strength until found. This type of damage should not grow or, if slow or arrested growth
occurs, the level of residual strength retained for the inspection interval is sufficiently above
limit load capability.
(iii) Category 3: Damage that can be reliably detected within a few flights
of occurrence by operations or ramp maintenance personnel without special skills in composite
inspection. Such damage must be in a location such that it is obvious by clearly visible evidence
or cause other indications of potential damage that becomes obvious in a short time interval
because of loss of the part form, fit or function. Both indications of significant damage warrant
an expanded inspection to identify the full extent of damage to the part and surrounding
structural areas. In practice, structural design features may be needed to provide sufficient large
damage capability to ensure limit or near limit load is maintained with easily detectable,
Category 3 damage. Structural substantiation for Category 3 damage includes demonstration of
a reliable and quick detection, while retaining limit or near limit load capability. The primary
difference between Category 2 and 3 damages are the demonstration of large damage capability
Page 13
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
at limit or near limit load for the latter after a regular interval of time which is much shorter than
the former. The residual strength demonstration for Category 3 damage may be dependent on
the reliable short time detection interval. Some examples of Category 3 damage include large
VID or other obvious damage that will be caught during walk-around inspection or during the
normal course of operations (e.g., fuel leaks, system malfunctions or cabin noise).
(iv) Category 4: Discrete source damage from a known incident such that
flight maneuvers are limited. Structural substantiation for Category 4 damage includes a
demonstration of residual strength for loads specified in the regulations. It should be noted that
pressurized structure will generally have Category 4 residual strength requirements at a level
higher than shown in figure 3. Some examples of Category 4 damage include rotor burst,
birdstrikes (as specified in the regulations), tire bursts, and severe in-flight hail.
(v) Category 5: Severe damage created by anomalous ground or flight
events, which is not covered by design criteria or structural substantiation procedures. This
damage is in the current guidance to ensure the engineers responsible for composite aircraft
structure design and the FAA work with maintenance organizations in making operations
personnel aware of possible damage from Category 5 events and the essential need for
immediate reporting to responsible maintenance personnel. It is also the responsibility of
structural engineers to design-in sufficient damage resistance such that Category 5 events are
self-evident to the operations personnel involved. An interface is needed with engineering to
properly define a suitable conditional inspection based on available information from the
anomalous event. Such action will facilitate the damage characterization needed prior to repair.
Some examples of Category 5 damage include severe service vehicle collisions with aircraft,
anomalous flight overload conditions, abnormally hard landings, maintenance jacking errors, and
loss of aircraft parts in flight, including possible subsequent high-energy, wide-area (blunt)
impact with adjacent structure. Some Category 5 damage scenarios will not have clearly visual
indications of damage, particularly in composite structures. However, there should be
knowledge of other evidence from the related events that ensure safety is protected, starting with
a complete report of possible damage by operations.
(d) The five categories of damage will be used as examples in subsequent discussion
in this paragraph and in paragraphs 9 and 10. Note that Category 2, 3, 4, and 5 damages all have
associated repair scenarios.
(2) Structure details, elements, and subcomponents of critical structural areas should be
tested under repeated loads to define the sensitivity of the structure to damage growth. This
testing can form the basis for validating a no-growth approach to the damage tolerance
requirements. The testing should assess the effect of the environment on the flaw and damage
growth characteristics and the no-growth validation. The environment used should be
appropriate to the expected service usage. Residual stresses will develop at the interfaces
between composite and metal structural elements in a design due to differences in thermal
expansion. This component of stress will depend on the service temperature during repeated
load cycling and is considered in the damage tolerance evaluation. Inspection intervals should
be established, considering both the likelihood of a particular damage and the residual strength
capability associated with this damage. The intent of this is to assure that structure is not
Page 14
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
exposed to an excessive period of time with residual strength less than ultimate, providing a
lower safety level than in the typical slow growth situation, as illustrated in figure 4.
Conservative assumptions for capability with large damage sizes that would be detected within a
few flights may be needed when probabilistic data on the likelihood of given damage sizes does
not exist. Once the damage is detected, the component is either repaired to restore ultimate load
capability or replaced.
Damage initiation
Residual strength •
or occurrence
H
*
Slow-growth approach
Ultimate loads r - - --------- "'
I
I
I No-growth approach **
I
Limit loads
*
Repair to Restore Ultimate St rength
**No growth without repair is n ot acceptable
Tim-e
--
------ - Shows Acceptable Interval at reduced RS before being repaired (No-growth case).
--- Shows Unacceptable Interval at reduced RS before being repaired (No-growth case).
Figure 4 - Schematic diagram of residual strength illustrating that significant accidental
damage with “no-growth” should not be left in the structure without repair for a long time
(a) The traditional slow growth approach may be appropriate for certain damage
types found in composites if the growth rate can be shown to be slow, stable and predictable.
Slow growth characterization should yield conservative and reliable results. As part of the slow
growth approach, an inspection program should be developed consisting of the frequency, extent,
and methods of inspection for inclusion in the maintenance plan. Inspection intervals should be
established such that the damage will have a very high probability of detection between the time
it becomes initially inspectable and the time at which the extent of the damage reduces the
residual static strength to limit load (considered as ultimate), including the effects of
environment. For any detected damage size that reduces the load capability below ultimate, the
component is either repaired to restore ultimate load capability or replaced. Should functional
impairment (such as unacceptable loss of stiffness) occur before the damage becomes otherwise
critical, part repair or replacement will also be necessary.
(b) Another approach involving growth may be appropriate for certain damage types
and design features adopted for composites if the growth can reliably be shown to be predictable
and arrested before it becomes critical. Figure 5 shows schematic diagrams for all three damage
growth approaches applied to composite structure. The arrested growth method is applicable
when the damage growth is mechanically arrested or terminated before becoming critical
(residual static strength reduced to limit load), as illustrated in figure 5. Arrested growth may
occur due to design features such as a geometry change, reinforcement, thickness change, or a
structural joint. This approach is appropriate for damage growth that is inspectable and found to
be reliably arrested, including all appropriate dynamic effects. Structural details, elements, and
Page 15
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
subcomponents of critical structural areas, components or full-scale structures, should be tested
under repeated loads for validating an arrested growth approach. As was the case for a “no-
growth” approach to damage tolerance, inspection intervals should be established, considering
the residual strength capability associated with the arrested growth damage size (refer to the
dashed lines added to figure 5 to conceptually show inspection intervals consistent with the slow
growth basis). Again, this is intended to ensure that the structure does not remain in a damaged
condition with residual strength capability close to limit load for long periods of time before
repair. For any damage size that reduces load capability below ultimate, the component is either
repaired to restore ultimate load capability or replaced.
See Figure 4 for an example residual strength curve for the "No Growth" Case.
Ultimat~!==r===============-==:----------­
~ :.:_ - - - - +
Static Strength Limit
--1-------'l:.:-=-=-==Ar=--re=st-=e=d=--G=row=-=t=h=--=-=-=-==--=-=------------"-i..----
+------..
_ _J
Damage Size Arrested Growth
-+--··- ··- ··- ··- ··+
I _J I
No G~~th .. - .. - .. - . ~low Growth
Threshold of
------ I -
Detectability_
time
Slow Growth
Inspection Interval Basis
-+--··- ··- ··- • Acceptable "No-growth" Inspection Interval for
Damage Shown
..... ---------~ Acceptable "Arrested Growth" Inspection Interval for
Damage Shown
Figure 5 - Illustrations of residual strength and damage size relationships for three
different approaches to composite structural damage tolerance substantiation
(c) The repeated loading should be representative of anticipated service usage. The
repeated load testing should include damage levels (including impact damage) typical of those
that may occur during fabrication, assembly, and in-service, consistent with the inspection
techniques employed. The damage tolerance test articles should be fabricated and assembled in
accordance with production specifications and processes so that the test articles are
representative of production structure.
(3) The extent of initially detectable damage should be established and be consistent with
the inspection techniques employed during manufacture and in service. This information will
naturally establish the transition between Category 1 and 2 damage types (i.e., inspection
methods used by trained inspectors in scheduled maintenance). For damage that is clearly
detectable to an extent that it will likely be found before scheduled maintenance (i.e., allowing
classification as Category 3 damage), detection over shorter intervals and by untrained personnel
Page 16
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
may be permitted. Flaw/damage growth data should be obtained by repeated load cycling of
intrinsic flaws or mechanically introduced damage. The number of cycles applied to validate
both growth and no-growth concepts should be statistically significant, and may be determined
by load and/or life considerations and a function of damage size. The growth or no growth
evaluation should be performed by analysis supported by test evidence or by tests at the coupon,
element, or subcomponent level.
(4) The extent of damage for residual strength assessments should be established,
including considerations for the probability of detection using selected field inspection
procedures. The first four categories of damage should be considered based on the damage
threat assessment. In addition, Category 3 damage should be detected in a walk-around
inspection or through the normal course of operations. Residual strength evaluation by
component or subcomponent testing or by analysis supported by test evidence should be
performed considering that damage. The evaluation should demonstrate that the residual
strength of the structure will reliably be equal to or greater than the strength required for the
specified design loads (considered as ultimate), including environmental effects. The statistical
significance of reliable subcomponent and detail residual strength assessments may include
conservative methods and engineering judgment. It should be shown that stiffness properties
have not changed beyond acceptable levels.
(a) For the no-growth, slow growth, arrested growth approaches, residual strength
testing should be performed after repeated load cycling. All probabilistic analyses applied for
residual strength assessments should properly account for the complex nature of damage defined
from a thorough damage threat assessment. Conservative damage metrics are permitted in such
analyses assuming sufficient test data on repeated load and environmental exposure exists.
(b) Composite designs should afford the same level of fail-safe, multiple load path
structure assurance as conventional metals design. Such is also the expectation in justifying the
use of static strength allowables with a statistical basis of 90 percent probability with 95 percent
confidence.
(c) Some special residual strength considerations for bonded structure are given in
paragraph 6.c.(3).
(5) The repeated load spectrum developed for fatigue testing and analysis purposes
should be representative of the anticipated service usage. Low amplitude load levels that can be
shown not to contribute to damage growth may be omitted (truncated). Reducing maximum load
levels (clipping) is generally not accepted. Variability in repeated load behavior should be
covered by appropriate load enhancement or life scatter factors and these factors should take into
account the number of specimens tested. The use of such factors to demonstrate reliability in
component tests should be consistent with the fatigue and damage tolerance behavior
characterized for the materials, processes and other design details of the structure in building
block tests.
(6) An inspection program should be developed consisting of frequency, extent, and
methods of inspection for inclusion in the maintenance plan. Inspection intervals should be
Page 17
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
established such that the damage will be reliably detected between the time it initially becomes
detectable and the time at which the extent of damage reaches the limits for required residual
strength capability. The potential for missed inspections should be considered.
(a) For the case of no-growth design concept, inspection intervals should be
established as part of the maintenance program. In selecting such intervals, the residual strength
level associated with the assumed damages should be considered. This point was illustrated in
figures 4 and 5. Note that an acceptable inspection interval for the larger damages shown for the
“no-growth” and “arrested growth” options in figures 4 and 5 was conceptually shown as related
to an acceptable slow growth basis in terms of the residual strength and time below ultimate load
before damage was detected and repaired. Data on the probability of occurrence for different
damage sizes also helps define an inspection interval.
(b) A thorough composite damage threat assessment and the separation of different
damage sizes into categories, each with associated detection methods, supports programs using a
rigorous damage tolerance assessment to avoid conservative design criteria with very large
damage assumptions. In such cases, Category 2 damage types will require the structural
substantiation of well-specified and reliable inspection methods applied by trained inspectors at
scheduled maintenance intervals (by default, Category 1 damage is at the threshold of this
evaluation). Those damages classified as Category 3 may take advantage of shorter service time
intervals provided sufficient structural substantiation exists with demonstrated proof that there
will be early detection by untrained ramp maintenance or operations personnel. By definition,
Category 4 damage will require residual strength substantiation to levels that complete a flight
with limited maneuvers based on the associated regulatory loads. Due to the nature of service
events leading to Category 4 damage, suitable inspections will need to be defined to evaluate the
full extent of damage, prior to subsequent aircraft repair and return to service. By definition,
Category 5 damages do not have associated damage tolerance design criteria or related structural
substantiation tasks. Category 5 damage will require suitable inspections based on engineering
assessment of the anomalous service event, and appropriate structural repair and/or part
replacement, prior to the aircraft re-entering service.
(7) The structure should be able to withstand static loads (considered as ultimate loads)
which are reasonably expected during a completion of the flight on which damage resulting from
obvious discrete sources occur (i.e., uncontained engine failures, etc.). The extent of damage
should be based on a rational assessment of service mission and potential damage relating to
each discrete source. Structural substantiation will be needed for the most critical Category 4
damage as related to the associated load cases. Those Category 4 damages that will not require
specific residual strength assessments for the associated get home loads because they have high
margins (e.g., severe in-flight hail) will likely still require suitable inspections because their
detectability may not be consistent with the substantiations validated for Category 2 damage
types.
(8) The effects of temperature, humidity, and other environmental or time-related aging
factors which may result in material property degradation should be addressed in the damage
tolerance evaluation. Unless tested in the environment, appropriate environmental factors should
be derived and applied in the evaluation.
Page 18
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
b. Fatigue Evaluation. Fatigue substantiation should be accomplished by component
fatigue tests or by analysis supported by test evidence, accounting for the effects of the
appropriate environment. The test articles should be fabricated and assembled in accordance
with production specifications and processes so that the test articles are representative of
production structures. Sufficient component, subcomponent, element or coupon tests should be
performed to establish the fatigue scatter and the environmental effects. Component,
subcomponent, and/or element tests may be used to evaluate the fatigue response of structure
with impact damage levels typical of those that may occur during fabrication, assembly, and in
service, consistent with the inspection procedures employed. Other allowed manufacturing and
service defects, which would exist for the life of the structure, should also be included in fatigue
testing. It should be demonstrated during the fatigue tests that the stiffness properties have not
changed beyond acceptable levels. Replacement lives should be established based on the test
results. By definition, Category 1 damage is subjected to fatigue evaluation and expected to
retain ultimate load capability for the life of the aircraft structure.
c. Combined Damage Tolerance and Fatigue Evaluation. Generally, it is appropriate for
a given structure to establish both an inspection program and demonstrate a service life to cover
all detectable and non-detectable damage, respectively, which is anticipated for the intended
aircraft usage. Extensions in service life should include evidence from component repeated load
testing, fleet leader programs (including NDI and destructive tear-down inspections), and
appropriate statistical assessments of accidental damage and environmental service data
considerations.
9. Proof of Structure – Flutter and Other Aeroelastic Instabilities. The aeroelastic
evaluations, which includes flutter, control reversal, divergence, and any undue loss of stability
and control as a result of structural loading and resulting deformation, are required. Flutter and
other aeroelastic instabilities must be avoided through design, quality control, maintenance, and
systems interaction.
a. The evaluation of composite structure needs to account for the effects of repeated
loading, environmental exposure, and service damage scenarios (e.g., large Category 2, 3 or 4
damage) on critical properties such as stiffness, mass, and damping. Some control surfaces
exposed to large damage retain adequate residual strength margins, but the potential loss of
stiffness or mass increase (e.g., sandwich panel disbond and/or water ingression) may adversely
affect flutter and other aeroelastic characteristics. This is particularly important for control
surfaces that are prone to accidental damage and environmental degradation. Other factors such
as the weight or stiffness changes due to repair, manufacturing flaws, and multiple layers of paint
need to be evaluated. There may also be issues associated with the proximity of high
temperature heat sources near structural components (e.g., empennage structure in the path of jet
engine exhaust streams or engine bleed air pneumatic system ducting). These effects may be
determined by analysis supported by test evidence, or by tests at the coupon, element or
subcomponent level.
10. Continued Airworthiness. The maintenance and repair of composite aircraft structure
should meet all general, design and fabrication, static strength, fatigue/damage tolerance, flutter,
Page 19
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
and other considerations covered by this AC as appropriate for the particular type of structure
and its application.
a. Design for Maintenance. Composite aircraft structure should be designed for inspection
and repair access in a field maintenance environment. The inspection and repair methods
applied for structural details should recognize the special documentation and training needed for
critical damage types that are difficult to detect, characterize, and repair. The inspection
intervals and life limits for any structural details and levels of damage that preclude repair must
be clearly documented in the appropriate continued airworthiness documents.
b. Maintenance Practices. Maintenance manuals should be developed by the appropriate
organizations to include the necessary inspection, maintenance, and repair procedures for
composite structures, including jacking, disassembly, handling, part drying methods, and
repainting instructions (including restrictions for paint colors that increase structural
temperatures). Special equipment, repair materials, ancillary materials, tooling, processing
procedures, and other information needed for inspection or repair of a given part should be
identified since standard field practices, which have been substantiated for different aircraft types
and models, are not common.
(1) Damage Detection.
(a) Procedures used for damage detection must be shown to be reliable and capable
of detecting degradation in structural integrity below ultimate load capability. These procedures
must be documented in the appropriate sections of the instructions for continued airworthiness.
This should be substantiated in static strength, environmental resistance, fatigue, and damage
tolerance efforts as outlined in paragraphs 6, 7, and 8. Substantiated detection procedures will be
needed for all damage types identified by the threat assessment, including a wide range of
foreign object impact threats, manufacturing defects, and degradation caused by overheating.
Degradation in surface layers (e.g., paints and coatings) that provide structural protection against
ultraviolet exposure must be detected. Any degradation to the lightning strike protection system
that affects structural integrity, fuel tank safety, and electrical systems must also be detected.
(b) Visual inspection is the predominant damage detection method used in the field
and should be performed under prescribed lighting conditions. Visual inspection procedures
should account for access, time relaxation in impact damage dent depth, and the color, finish,
and cleanliness of part surfaces.
(2) Inspection. Visual indications of damage, which are often used for composite
damage detection, provide limited details on the hidden parts of damage that require further
investigation. As a result, additional inspection procedures used for complete composite damage
characterization will generally be different than those used for initial damage detection and need
to be well documented. Nondestructive inspection performed prior to repair and destructive
processing steps performed during repair must be shown to locate and determine the full extent
of the damage. In-process controls of repair quality and post-repair inspection methods must be
shown to be reliable and capable of providing engineers with the data to determine degradation
in structural integrity below ultimate load capability caused by the process itself. Certain
Page 20
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
processing defects cannot be reliably detected at completion of the repair (e.g., weak bonds). In
such cases, the damage threat assessment, repair design features, and limits should ensure
sufficient damage tolerance.
(3) Repair. All bolted and bonded repair design and processing procedures applied for a
given structure shall be substantiated to meet the appropriate requirements. Of particular safety
concern are the issues associated with bond material compatibilities, bond surface preparation
(including drying, cleaning, and chemical activation), cure thermal management, composite
machining, special composite fasteners, and installation techniques, and the associated in-process
control procedures. The surface layers (e.g., paints and coatings) that provide structural
protection against ultraviolet exposure, structural temperatures, and the lightning strike
protection system must also be properly repaired.
(4) Documentation and Reporting. Documentation on all repairs must be added to the
maintenance records for the specific part number. This information supports future maintenance
damage disposition and repair activities performed on the same part. It is recommended that
service difficulties, damage, and degradation occurring to composite parts in service should be
reported back to the original equipment manufacturer (OEM) to aid in continuous updates of
damage threat assessments to support future design detail and process improvements. Such
information will also support future design criteria, analysis, and test database development.
c. Substantiation of Repair.
(1) When repair procedures are provided in FAA-approved documents or the
maintenance manual, it should be demonstrated by analysis and/or test that the method and
techniques of repair will restore the structure to an airworthy condition. Repairable damage
limits (RDL), which outline the details for damage to structural components that may be repaired
based on existing data, must be clearly defined and documented. Allowable damage limits
(ADL), which do not require repair, must also be clearly defined and documented. Both RDL
and ADL must be based on sufficient analysis and test data to meet the appropriate structural
substantiation requirements and other considerations outlined in this AC. Additional
substantiation data will generally be needed for damage types and sizes not previously
considered in design development. Some damage types may require special instructions for field
repair and the associated quality control. Bonded repair is subjected to the same structural
bonding considerations as the base design (refer to paragraph 6.c).
(2) Operators and maintenance repair organizations (MRO) wishing to complete major
repairs or alterations outside the scope of approved repair documentation should be aware of the
extensive analysis, design, process, and test substantiation required to ensure the airworthiness of
a certificated structure. Documented records and the certification approval of this substantiation
should be retained to support any subsequent maintenance activities.
d. Damage Detection, Inspection and Repair Competency.
(1) All technicians, inspectors, and engineers involved in damage disposition and repair
should have the necessary skills to perform their supporting maintenance tasks on a specific
Page 21
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
composite structural part. The continuous demonstration of acquired skills goes beyond initial
training (e.g., similar to a welder qualification). The repair design, inspection methods, and
repair procedures used will require approved structural substantiation data for the particular
composite part. Society of Automotive Engineers International (SAE) Aerospace Information
Report (AIR) 5719 outlines training for an awareness of the safety issues for composite
maintenance and repair. Additional training for specific skill-building will be needed to execute
particular engineering, inspection, and repair tasks.
(2) Pilots, ramp maintenance, and other operations personnel that service aircraft should
be trained to immediately report anomalous ramp incidents and flight events that may potentially
cause serious damage to composite aircraft structures. In particular, immediate reporting is
needed for those service events that are outside the scope of the damage tolerance substantiation
and standard maintenance practices for a given structure. The immediate detection of Category 4
and 5 damages are dependent on the proper reaction of personnel that operate and service the
aircraft. Please refer to regulations in parts 21, 121, and 135 for reporting requirements.
11. Additional Considerations.
a. Crashworthiness.
(1) The crashworthiness of the aircraft is dominated by the impact response
characteristics of the fuselage. Regulations, in general, evolve based on either experience gained
through incidents and accidents of existing aircraft or in anticipation of safety issues raised by
new designs. In the case of crashworthiness, regulations have evolved as experience has been
gained during actual aircraft operations. For example, emergency load factors and passenger
seat loads have been established to reflect dynamic conditions observed from fleet experience
and from controlled FAA and industry research. Fleet experience has not demonstrated a need to
have an aircraft level crashworthiness standard. As a result, the regulations reflect the
capabilities of traditional aluminum aircraft structure under survivable crash conditions. This
approach was satisfactory as aircraft have continued to be designed using traditional construction
methods. With the advent of composite fuselage structure and/or the use of novel design, this
historical approach may no longer be sufficient to substantiate the same level of protection for
the passengers as provided by similar metallic designs.
(2) Airframe design should assure that occupants have every reasonable chance of
escaping serious injury under realistic and survivable crash impact conditions. A composite
design should account for unique behavior and structural characteristics, including major repairs
or alterations, as compared with conventional metal airframe designs. Structural evaluation may
be done by test or analysis supported by test evidence. Service experience may also support
substantiation.
(3) The crash dynamics of an aircraft and the associated energy absorption are difficult to
model and fully define representative tests with respect to structural requirements. Each aircraft
product type (i.e., transport, small airplane, rotorcraft) has unique regulations governing the
crashworthiness of particular aircraft structures. The regulations and guidance associated
Page 22
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
with each product type should be used accordingly. The regulations for transport airplane and
rotorcraft address some issues that go beyond those required of small airplanes.
(4) Special conditions are anticipated for transport category airplanes with composite
fuselage structure to address crashworthiness survivability. The impact response of a composite
transport fuselage structure must be evaluated to ensure the survivability is not significantly
different from that of a similar-sized aircraft fabricated from metallic materials. Impact loads
and resultant structural deformation of the supporting airframe and floor structures must be
evaluated. Four main criteria areas should be considered in making such an evaluation.
(a) Occupants must be protected during the impact event from release of items of
mass (e.g., overhead bins).
(b) The emergency egress paths must remain following a survivable crash.
(c) The acceleration and loads experienced by occupants during a survivable crash
must not exceed critical thresholds.
(d) A survivable volume of occupant space must be retained following the impact
event.
(5) The criticality of each of these four criteria will depend on the particular crash
conditions. For example, the loads and accelerations experienced by passengers may be higher
at lower impact velocities where structural failures have not started to occur. As a result,
validated analyses may be needed to practically cover all the crashworthiness criteria for
transport fuselage.
(6) Existing transport airplane requirements also require that fuel tank structural integrity
be addressed during a survivable crash impact event as related to fire safety (also refer to
paragraph 11.b). As related to crashworthiness, composite fuel tank structure must not fail or
deform to the extent that fire becomes a greater hazard than with metal structure.
(7) Physics and mechanics of the crashworthiness for composite structures involve
several issues. The local strength, energy absorbing characteristics, and multiple, competing
failure modes need to be addressed for composite structure subjected to a survivable crash. This
is not simply achieved for airframe structures made from anisotropic, quasi-brittle, composite
materials. As a result, the accelerations and load histories experienced by passengers and
equipment on a composite aircraft may differ significantly from that seen on a similar metallic
aircraft unless specific considerations are designed into the composite structure. In addition, care
should be taken when altering composite structure to achieve specific mechanical behaviors.
(For example, where the change in behavior of a metallic structure with a change in material
thickness may be easily predicted, an addition or deletion of plies to a composite laminate may
also require data for the effects of laminate stacking sequence on the failure mode and energy
absorption characteristics of a composite element.)
Page 23
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
(8) Representative structure must be included to gain valid test and analysis results.
Depending on aircraft loading (requiring investigation of various aircraft passenger and cargo
configurations), structural dynamic considerations, and progressive failures, local strain rates and
loading conditions may differ throughout the structure. Sensitivity of the structural behavior to
reasonable impact orientation should also be considered for transport airplane and rotorcraft
applications. This can be addressed by analysis supported by test evidence.
(9) Considering a need for comparative assessments with metal structure and a range of
crash conditions, analysis with sufficient structural test evidence is often needed for transport and
rotorcraft applications. Analysis requires extensive investigation of model sensitivity to
modeling parameters (e.g., mesh optimization, representation of joints, element material input
stress-strain data). Test also requires investigation of test equipment sensitivity appropriate to
composites (e.g., filter frequencies with respect to expected pulse characteristics in the structure).
Model validation may be achieved using a building block approach, culminating in an adequately
complex test (e.g., a drop test with sufficient structural details to properly evaluate the
crashworthiness criteria).
b. Fire Protection, Flammability and Thermal Issues.
(1) Fire and exposure to temperatures that exceed maximum operating conditions require
special considerations for composite airframe structure. (Refer to note below.) Requirements
for flammability and fire protection of aircraft structure attempt to minimize the hazard to
occupants in the event that flammable materials, fluids, or vapors ignite. The regulations
associated with each aircraft product type (i.e., transport, small airplane, rotorcraft) should be
used accordingly. Compliance may be shown by tests or analysis supported by test evidence. A
composite design, including repair and alterations, should not decrease the existing level of
safety relative to metallic structure. In addition, maintenance procedures should be available to
evaluate the structural integrity of any composite aircraft structures exposed to fire and
temperatures above the maximum operating conditions substantiated during design.
-N-ot-e: Aircraft cabin interiors and baggage compartments have been
areas of flammability concerns in protecting passenger safety.
This revision of the AC does not address composite
materials used in aircraft interiors and baggage compartments.
Please consult other guidance material for acceptable means of
compliance with flammability rules for interiors.
(2) Fire protection and flammability has traditionally been considered for engine mount
structure, firewalls, and other powerplant structures that include composite elements. Additional
issues critical to passenger safety have come with the expanded use of composites in wing and
fuselage structures for transport airplanes. Existing regulations do not address the potential for
the airframe structure itself to be flammable. Wing and fuselage applications should consider the
effects of composite design and construction on the resulting passenger safety in the event of
in-flight fires or emergency landing conditions, which combine with subsequent egress when a
fuel-fed fire is possible.
Page 24
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
(3) The results of fire protection and flammability testing with structural composite parts
indicate dependence upon overall design and process details, as well as the origin of the fire and
its extent. For example, the overall effects of composite fuselage structures exposed to fire may
be significantly different when the fire originates within the cabin, where it can be controlled by
limiting the structure’s contribution to spreading the fire, than when the fire occurs exterior to the
fuselage after a crash landing, where fuel is likely to be the primary source for maintaining and
spreading the fire. The threat in each case is different, and the approach to mitigation may also
be different. In-flight fire safety addresses a fire originating within the airplane due to some
fault, whereas post-crash fire safety addresses a fuel-fed pool fire external to the airplane.
Special conditions are anticipated for transport category airplanes with fuselage structure
subjected to both in-flight and post-crash fire conditions. Transport wing structure will need to
have special conditions for post-crash fire conditions.
(4) For an in-flight fire in transport category airplanes, it is critical that the fire not
propagate or generate hazardous quantities of toxic by-products. In-flight fires have been
catastrophic when they can grow in inaccessible areas. Composite fuselage structure could play
a role different than traditional metal structure if the issue is not addressed.
(5) Metallic transport fuselage and wing structures have established a benchmark in fire
protection that can be used to evaluate specific composite wing and fuselage structural details.
Exterior fire protection issues associated with composite transport structure must include the
effects of an exterior pool fire following a survivable crash landing. Fuselage structure should
provide sufficient time for passenger egress, without fire penetration or the release of gasses
and/or materials that are either toxic to escaping passengers or could increase the fire severity.
Furthermore, these considerations must be extended to wing and fuel tank structure, which must
also be prevented from collapse and release of fuel (including consideration of the influence of
fuel load upon the structural behavior). For transport category airplanes, the standards of
§ 25.856(b) provide the benchmark to establish the required level of safety.
(6) The exposure of composite structures to high temperatures needs to extend beyond
the direct flammability and fire protection issues to other thermal issues. Many composite
materials have glass transition temperatures, which mark the onset of reductions in strength and
stiffness that are somewhat lower than the temperatures that can have a similar affect on
equivalent metallic structure. The glass transition temperature of most composite materials is
further reduced by moisture absorption. The reduced strength or stiffness of composites from
high temperature exposures must be understood per the requirements of particular applications
(e.g., engine or other system failures). After a system failure and/or known fire, it may be
difficult to detect the full extent of irreversible heat damage to an exposed composite structure.
As a result, composite structures exposed to high temperatures may require special inspections,
tests, and analysis for proper disposition of heat damage. All appropriate damage threats and
degradation mechanisms need to be identified and integrated into the damage tolerance and
maintenance evaluation accordingly. Reliable inspections and test measurements of the extent of
damage that exists in a part exposed to unknown levels of high temperatures should be
documented. Particular attention should be given to defining the maximum damages that likely
could remain undetected by the selected inspection procedures.
Page 25
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
c. Lightning Protection. Lightning protection design features are needed for composite
aircraft structures. Current carbon fiber composites are approximately 1,000 times less
electrically conductive than standard aluminum materials, and composite resins and adhesives
are traditionally non-conductive. Glass and aramid fiber composites are non-conductive. A
lightning strike to composite structures can result in structural failure or large area damage, and it
can induce high lightning current and voltage on metal hydraulic tubes, fuel system tubes, and
electrical wiring if proper conductive lightning protection is not provided. Aircraft lightning
protection design guidance can be found in the FAA Technical Report “Aircraft Lightning
Protection Handbook” (DOT/FAA/CT-89/22). The lightning protection effectiveness for
composite structures should be demonstrated by tests or analysis supported by tests. Such tests
are typically performed on panels, coupons, subassemblies, or coupons representative of the
aircraft structure, or tests on full aircraft. The lightning test waveforms and lightning attachment
zones are defined in the SAE reports referenced in AC 20-155. Any structural damage observed
in standard lightning tests should be limited to Category 1, 2 or 3, depending on the level of
detection. This damage is characterized and integrated into damage tolerance analyses and tests
as appropriate. Small simple airplanes certified under 14 CFR part 23 for VFR use only may be
certified based on engineering assessment, according to AC 23-15. The effects of composite
structural repairs and maintenance on the lightning protection system should be evaluated.
Repairs should be designed to maintain lightning protection.
(1) Lightning Protection for Structural Integrity.
(a) The composite structural design should incorporate the lightning protection when
appropriate for the anticipated lightning attachment. The extent of lightning protection features
depends on the lightning attachment zone designated for that area of the aircraft. Lightning
protection features may include, but are not limited to, metal wires or mesh added to the outside
surface of the composite structure where direct lightning attachment is expected.
(b) When lightning strikes an aircraft, very high currents flow through the airframe.
Proper electrical bonding must be incorporated between structural parts, which is most difficult
for moveable parts (i.e., ailerons, rudders, and elevators). The electrical bonding features must
be sized to conduct the lightning currents or they can vaporize, sending the high currents through
unintended paths such as control cables, control rods, or hydraulic tubes. Guidance for
certification of lightning protection of aircraft structures can be found in SAE Aerospace
Recommended Practice (ARP) 5577, referenced in Transport Airplane Directorate Policy
Statement ANM-111-05-004.
(2) Lightning Protection for Fuel Systems.
(a) Special consideration must be given to the fuel system lightning protection for an
aircraft with integral fuel tanks in a composite structure. Composite structure with integral fuel
systems must incorporate specific lightning protection features on the external composite
surfaces, on joints, on fasteners, and for structural supports for fuel system plumbing and
components to eliminate structural penetration, arcing, sparks or other ignition sources. AC
20-53 provides certification guidance for aircraft fuel system lightning protection.
Page 26
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
(b) Transport airplane regulations for fuel system ignition prevention in § 25.981
require lightning protection that is failure tolerant. As a result, redundant and robust lightning
protection for composite structure joints and fasteners in fuel tank structure is needed to ensure
proper protection in preventing ignition sources.
(3) Lightning Protection for Electrical and Electronic Systems.
(a) Lightning strike protection of composite structures is needed to avoid inducing
high lightning voltages and currents on the wiring for electrical and electronic systems whose
upset or damage could affect safe aircraft operation. The consequences from a lightning strike of
unprotected composite structures can be catastrophic for electrical and electronic systems that
perform highly critical functions, such as fly-by-wire flight controls or engine controls.
(b) Electrical shields over system wiring and robust circuit design of electrical and
electronic equipment both provide some protection against system upset or damage due to
lightning. Since most composite materials provide poor shielding, at best, metal foil or mesh is
typically added to the composite structure to provide additional shielding for wiring and
equipment. Electrical bonding between composite structure parts and panels should be provided
for the shielding to be effective. AC 20-136 provides certification guidance for aircraft electrical
and electronic system lightning protection.
s/
David Hempe
Manager, Aircraft Engineering Division
Aircraft Certification Service
Page 27
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
Appendix 1. Applicable Regulations and Relevant Guidance
1. Applicable Regulations. A list of applicable regulations is provided for subjects covered in
this AC. In most cases, these regulations apply regardless of the type of materials used in
aircraft structures.
AC Paragraphs Part 23 Part 25 Part 27 Part 29
1. Purpose of this AC ---------------------- Not Applicable -------------------------
2. To Whom this AC Applies ---------------------- Not Applicable -------------------------
3. Cancellation ---------------------- Not Applicable -------------------------
4. Related Regulations and Guidance ---------------------- Not Applicable -------------------------
5. General ---------------------- Not Applicable -------------------------
6. Material and Fabrication Development
603 6 03 6 03 603
605 6 05 6 05 605
609 6 09 6 09 609
613 6 13 6 13 613
619 6 19 6 19 619
7. Proof of Structure – Static 305 3 05 3 05 305
307 3 07 3 07 307
8. Proof of Structure – Fatigue and
Damage Tolerance 573 571 571 571
9. Proof of Structure – Flutter 629 6 29 6 29 629
10. Continued Airworthiness 1529 1529 1529 1529
App. G App. H App. A App. A
11. Additional Considerations
a. Crashworthiness 561 561 561 561
562 562 562 562
601 601 601 601
631 631
721 721
783 783 783 783
785 785 785 785
787 787 787 787
807 789 801 801
965 801 807 803
967 809 965 809
963 963
967 967
981 1413
Page A1-1
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
b. Fire Protection, Flammability, 609 609 609 609
and Thermal Issues 787 863 861 861
863 865 863 863
865 867 1183 903
867 903 1185 967
954 967 1191 1013
1121 1121 1193 1121
1182 1181 1194 1183
1183 1182 1185
1189 1183 1189
1191 1185 1191
1193 1189 1193
1359 1191 1194
1365 1193
c. Lightning Protection 867 581 610 610
954 954 954 954
981
1309 1316 1309 1309
---------------------------------------
Notes:
(1) This list may not be all inclusive and there may be differences between regulatory authorities.
(2)Special conditions may be issued for novel and unusual design features (e.g., new composite materials
systems).
2. Guidance. FAA issues guidance providing supportive information of showing compliance
with regulatory requirements. Guidance may include the AC and policy statements (PS). In
general, an AC presents information concerning acceptable means, but not the only means, of
complying with regulations. The guidance listed below is deemed supportive to the purposes of
this AC. These FAA documents can be located via website:
http://www.faa.gov/regulations_policies/.
a. ACs.
(1) AC 20-53, Protection of Airplane Fuel Systems Against Fuel Vapor Ignition
Due to Lightning [6/06]
(2) AC 20-135, Powerplant Installation and Propulsion System Component Fire
Protection Test Methods, Standards, and Criteria [2/90]
(3) AC 20-136, Protection of Aircraft Electrical/Electronic Systems Against the
Indirect Effects of Lightning [12/06]
(4) AC 20-155, SAE Documents to Support Aircraft Lightning Protection
Certification [4/06]
(5) AC 21-26, Quality Control for the Manufacture of Composite Structures [6/89]
(6) AC 21-31, Quality Control for the Manufacture of Non-Metallic Compartment
Interior Components [11/91]
Page A1-2
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
(7) AC 23-15, Small Airplane Certification Compliance Program [12/03]
(8) AC 23-20, Acceptance Guidance on Material Procurement and Process
Specifications for Polymer Matrix Composite Systems [9/03]
(9) AC 25.571-1, Damage Tolerance and Fatigue Evaluation of Structure [4/98]
(10) AC 29 MG 8, Substantiation of Composite Rotorcraft Structure [4/06]
(11) AC 35.37-1, Guidance Material for Fatigue Limit Tests and Composite Blade
Fatigue Substantiation [9/01]
(12) AC 145-6, Repair Stations for Composite and Bonded Aircraft Structure [11/96]
b. Policy Statements
(1) Static Strength Substantiation of Composite Airplane Structure
[PS-ACE100-2001-006, December 2001]
(2) Final Policy for Flammability Testing per 14 CFR Part 23, Sections 23.853,
23.855 and 23.1359 [PS-ACE100-2001-002, January 2002]
(3) Material Qualification and Equivalency for Polymer Matrix Composite Material
Systems [PS-ACE100-2002-006, September 2003]
(4) Bonded Joints and Structures - Technical Issues and Certification
Considerations [PS-ACE100-2005-10038, September 2005]
(5) Policy Statement on Acceptance of SAE International Aerospace Recommended
Practice 5577 as an Acceptable Method of Compliance to the Lightning Direct
Effects requirements of § 25.581 [ANM-111-05-004, April 2006]
Page A1-3
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
Appendix 2. Definitions
1. Allowables: Material values that are determined from test data at the laminate or lamina
level on a probability basis (e.g., A or B basis values, with 99% probability and 95% confidence,
or 90% probability and 95% confidence, respectively). The amount of data required to derive
these values is governed by the statistical significance (or basis) needed.
2. Anisotropic: Not isotropic; having mechanical and/or physical properties which vary with
direction relative to natural reference axes inherent in the material.
3. Arrested Growth Approach: A method that requires demonstration that the structure, with
defined flaws present, is able to withstand appropriate repeated loads with flaw growth which is
either mechanically arrested or terminated before becoming critical (residual static strength
reduced to limit load). This is to be associated with appropriate inspection intervals and damage
detectability.
4. Category of Damage: Five categories of damage have been defined based on residual
strength capability, required load level, detectability, inspection interval, damage threat and
whether (or not) the event creating damage is self evident.
5. Component: A major section of the airframe structure (e.g., wing, body, fin, horizontal
stabilizer) which can be tested as a complete unit to qualify the structure.
6. Coupon: A small test specimen (e.g., usually a flat laminate) for evaluation of basic lamina
or laminate properties or properties of generic structural features (e.g., bonded or mechanically
fastened joints).
7. Critical Structure: A load bearing structure/element whose integrity is essential in
maintaining the overall flight safety of the aircraft. This definition was adopted for this AC
because there are differences in the definitions of primary structure, secondary structure, and
principle structural elements (PSE) when considering the different categories of aircraft. For
example, PSE are critical structures for Transport Category Aircraft.
8. Damage: A structural anomaly caused by manufacturing (processing, fabrication, assembly
or handling) or service usage.
9. Debond: Same as Disbond.
10. Degradation: The alteration of material properties (e.g., strength, modulus, coefficient of
expansion) which may result from deviations in manufacturing or from repeated loading and/or
environmental exposure.
11. Delamination: The separation of the layers of material in a laminate. This may be local or
may cover a large area of the laminate. It may occur at any time in the cure or subsequent life of
the laminate and may arise from a wide variety of causes.
Page A2-1
8/24/10 AC 20-107B
12. Design Values: Material, structural elements, and structural detail properties that have been
determined from test data and chosen to assure a high degree of confidence in the integrity of the
completed structure. These values are most often based on allowables adjusted to account for
actual structural conditions, and used in analysis to compute margins-of-safety.
13. Detail: A non-generic structural element of a more complex structural member (e.g.,
specific design configured joints, splices, stringers, stringer runouts, or major access holes).
14. Disbond: An area within a bonded interface between two adherends in which an adhesion
failure or separation has occurred. It may occur at any time during the life of the substructure
and may arise from a wide variety of causes. Also, colloquially, an area of separation between
two laminae in the finished laminate (in this case, the term “delamination” is normally
preferred).
15. Discrepancy: A manufacturing anomaly allowed and detected by the planned inspection
procedure. They can be created by processing, fabrication or assembly procedures.
16. Element: A generic element of a more complex structural member (e.g., skin, stringers,
shear panels, sandwich panels, joints, or splices).
17. Environment: External, non-accidental conditions (excluding mechanical loading),
separately or in combination, that can be expected in service and which may affect the structure
(e.g., temperature, moisture, UV radiation, and fuel).
18. Factor(s):
a. Life (or Load) Enhancement Factor: An additional load factor and/or test duration
applied to structural repeated load tests, relative to the intended design load and life values, used
to account for material variability. It is used to develop the required level of confidence in data.
b. Life Scatter Factor: Same as Life/Load Enhancement Factor.
c. Overload Factor: A load factor applied to a specific structure test which is used to
address parameters (e.g., environment, a short test pyramid, etc.) not directly addressed in that
test. This factor is usually developed from lower pyramid testing addressing such parameters.
19. Heterogeneous: Descriptive term for a material consisting of dissimilar constituents
separately identifiable; a medium consisting of regions of unlike properties separated by internal
boundaries.
20. Impact Damage: A structural anomaly created by foreign object impact.
21. Intrinsic Flaw: Defect inherent in the composite material or resulting from the production
process.
Page A2-2
8/24/10 AC 20-107B
22. Manufacturing Defect: An anomaly or flaw occurring during manufacturing that can cause
varying levels of degradation in structural strength, stiffness and dimensional stability. Those
manufacturing defects (or permissible manufacturing variability) allowed by the quality control,
manufacturing acceptance criteria are expected to meet appropriate structural requirements for
the life of the aircraft part. Other manufacturing defects that escape detection in manufacturing
quality control should be included in a damage threat assessment and must meet damage
tolerance requirements until detected and repaired.
23. No-Growth Approach: A method that requires demonstration that the structure, with
defined flaws present, is able to withstand appropriate repeated loads without detrimental flaw
growth for the life of the structure.
24. Primary Structure: The structure which carries flight, ground, or pressurization loads, and
whose failure would reduce the structural integrity of the airplane.
25. Point Design: An element or detail of a specific design which is not considered generically
applicable to other structure for the purpose of substantiation, e.g., lugs and major joints. Such a
design element or detail can be qualified by test or by a combination of test and analysis.
26. Slow Growth Approach: A method that requires demonstration that the structure, with
defined flaws present, is able to withstand appropriate repeated loads with slow, stable, and
predictable flaw growth for the life of the structure, or beyond appropriate inspection intervals
associated with appropriate damage detectability.
27. Structural Bonding: A structural joint created by the process of adhesive bonding,
comprising of one or more previously-cured composite or metal parts (referred to as adherends).
28. Subcomponent: A major three-dimensional structure which can provide completed
structural representation of a section of the full structure (e.g., stub-box, section of a spar, wing
panel, body panel with frames).
29. Weak Bond: A bond line with mechanical properties lower than expected, but without any
possibility to detect that by normal NDI procedures. Such situation is mainly due to a poor
chemical bonding.
Page A2-3
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
Appendix 3. Change of Composite Material and/or Process
1. It is necessary to re-certify composite structures, which during production, incorporate
substitutions of, or changes to, the materials and/or processes from those originally substantiated
at the time of initial certification. For example, the original material supplier may either change
its product, or cease production. Manufacturers may also find it necessary to modify their
production processes to improve efficiency or correct product deficiencies. In either case, care
must be taken to ensure that modifications and/or changes are adequately investigated to ensure
the continued adequacy of already certified composite structure. This appendix covers such
material and/or process changes, but does not address other changes to design (e.g., geometry,
loading). The definition of the materials and processes used is required in the specifications by
14 CFR 21.31. Changes to the material and process specifications are often major changes in
type design and must be addressed as such under 14 CFR part 21, subpart D.
2. The qualification and structural substantiation of new or modified materials and/or processes
used to produce parts of a previously certified aircraft product requires:
a. The identification of the key material and/or process parameters governing performances;
b. The definition of the appropriate tests able to measure these parameters; and
c. The definition of pass/fail criteria for these tests.
3. “Qualification” procedures developed by every manufacturer include specifications covering:
a. Physical and chemical properties,
b. Mechanical properties (coupon level), and
c. Reproducibility (by testing several batches).
4. Specifications and manufacturing quality procedures are designed to control specific
materials and processes to achieve stable and repeatable structure for that combination of
materials and processes. However, the interchangeability of alternate materials and processes for
a structural application cannot be assumed if one only considers the properties outlined in those
specifications (as it could be for materials that are much less process dependent, e.g., some
metallic material forms). A structure fabricated using new or modified materials and/or
processes, which meets the “qualification” tests required for the original material and process
specifications, does not necessarily produce components that meet all the original engineering
requirements for the previously certified structure.
5. Until improvements in identifying the complex relations between key material parameters that
govern composite processing occurs, there will be a need for extensive and diverse testing that
directly interrogates material performance using a range of representative specimens of
increasing complexity in building block tests. Furthermore, failure modes may vary from one
material and/or process to another, and analytical models are sometimes insufficiently precise to
Page A3-1
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
reliably predict failure without sufficient empirical data. Therefore, a step-by-step test
verification with more complex specimens may be required.
6. Classification of Material or Process Change.
a. Any of the following situations requires further investigation of possible changes to a
given composite structure:
(1) Case A: A change in one or both of the basic constituents, resin, or fiber (including
sizing or surface treatment alone) would yield an alternate material. Other changes that result in
an alternate material include changes in fabric weave style, fiber aerial weight, and resin content.
(2) Case B: Same basic constituents, but any change of the resin impregnation method.
Such changes include: (i) prepregging process (e.g., solvent bath to hot melt coating), (ii) tow
size (3k, 6k, 12k) for tape material forms with the same fiber areal weight, (iii) prepregging
machine at the same suppliers, (iv) supplier change for a same material (licensed supplier).
(3) Case C: Same material, but modification of the processing route (if the modification
to the processing route governs eventual composite mechanical properties). Example process
changes of significance include: (i) curing cycle, (ii) bond surface preparation, (iii) changes in
the resin transfer molding process used in fabricating parts from dry fiber forms, (iv) tooling, (v)
lay-up method, (vi) environmental parameters of the material lay-up room, and (vii) major
assembly procedures.
b. For each of the above cases, a distinction should be made between those changes
intended to be a replica of the former material/process combination (Case B and some of Case C)
and those which are “truly new material” (Case A and some of Case C). So, two classes are
proposed:
(1) “Identical materials/processes” in cases intended to create a replica structure.
(2) “Alternative materials/processes” in cases intended to create truly new structure.
c. Within the “identical materials/processes” class, a subclassification can be made between
a change of the prepregging machine alone at the supplier and licensed production elsewhere.
For the time being, a change to a new fiber produced under a licensed process and reputed to be a
replica of the former one, will be dealt with as an “alternative material/process.”
d. Some minor changes within the class representing identical materials/processes may not
interact with structural performances (e.g., prepreg release papers, some bagging materials, etc.)
and should not be submitted as part of the recertification. However, the manufacturers (or the
supplier) should develop a proper system for screening those changes, with adequate proficiency
at all relevant decision levels. Other minor material changes that fall under Case B may warrant
sampling tests to show equivalency only at lower levels of building block substantiation.
e. Case C changes that may yield major changes in material and structural performance
Page A3-2
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
need to be evaluated at all appropriate levels of the building block tests to determine whether the
manufacturing process change yields identical or alternate materials. Engineering judgment will
be needed in determining the extent of testing based on the proposed manufacturing change.
f. Case A (alternative material) should always be considered as an important change, which
requires structural substantiation. It is not recommended to try a sub-classification according to
the basic constituents being changed, as material behavior (e.g., sensitivity to stress
concentrations) may be governed by interfacial properties, which may be affected either by a
fiber or a resin change.
7. Substantiation Method. Only the technical aspects of substantiation are addressed below.
a. Compliance Philosophy. Substantiation should be based on a comparability study
between the structural performances of the material accepted for type certification, and the
second material. Whatever the modification proposed for a certificated item, the revised margins
of safety should remain adequate. Any reduction in the previously demonstrated margin should
be investigated in detail.
(1) Alternative Material/Process: New design values for all relevant properties should
be determined for any alternate material/process combination. Analytical models initially used
to certify structure, including failure prediction models, should be reviewed and, if necessary,
substantiated by tests. The procurement specification should be modified (or a new specification
suited to the selected material should be defined) to ensure key quality variations are adequately
controlled and new acceptance criteria defined. For example, changing from first to second
generation of carbon fibers may improve tensile strength properties by more than 20% and a new
acceptability threshold will be needed in the specification of the alternate material to ensure the
detection of quality variations.
(2) Identical Material: Data should be provided that demonstrates that the original
design values (whatever the level of investigation, material or design) remain valid. Statistical
methods need to be employed for data to ensure that key design properties come from the same
populations as the original material/process combination. Calculation models including failure
prediction should remain the same. The technical content of the procurement specification (Case
B) should not need to be changed to properly control quality.
b. Testing.
(1) The extent of testing needed to substantiate a material change should address the
inherent structural behavior of the composite and will be a function of the airworthiness
significance of the part and the material change definition. For example, the investigation level
might be restricted to the generic specimens at the test pyramid base (refer to figures in
paragraph 7) for an identical material, but non-generic test articles from higher up the pyramid
should be included for an alternative material. Care needs to be taken to ensure that the test
methods used yield data compatible with data used to determine properties of the original
structure.
Page A3-3
9/8/09 AC 20-107B
(2) The testing that may be required for a range of possible material and/or process
changes should consider all levels of structural substantiation that may be affected. In some
instances (e.g., a minor cure cycle change), possible consequences can be assessed by tests on
generic specimens only. For other changes, like those involving tooling (e.g., from a full bag
process to thermo-expansive cores), the assessment should include an evaluation of the
component itself (sometimes called the “tool proof test”). In this case, an expanded NDI
procedure should be required for the first items to be produced. This should be supplemented –
if deemed necessary – by “cut up” specimens from a representative component, for physical or
mechanical investigations.
c. Number of Batches.
(1) The purpose for testing a number of batches is the demonstration of an acceptable
reproducibility of material characteristics. The number of batches required should take into
account: material classification (identical or alternative), the investigation level (non-generic or
generic specimen) the source of supply, and the property under investigation. Care should be
taken to investigate the variation of both basic material and the manufacturing process.
(2) Existing references (e.g., The Composite Materials Handbook (CMH-17) Volumes 1
and 3, FAA Technical Report DOT/ FAA/AR-03/19), addressing composite qualification and
equivalence and the building block approach, provide more detailed guidance regarding batch
and test numbers and the appropriate statistical analysis up to laminate level. Changes at higher
pyramid levels, or those associated with other material forms, e.g., braided VARTM (Vacuum-
Assisted Resin Transfer Molding) structure, may require use of other statistical procedures or
engineering methods.
d. Pass/Fail Criteria. Target pass/fail criteria should be established as part of the test
program. For strength considerations for instance, a statistical analysis of test data should
demonstrate that new design values derived for the second material provide an adequate margin
of safety. Therefore, provision should be made for a sufficient number of test specimens to
allow for such analysis. At the non-generic level, when only one test article is used to assess a
structural feature, the pass criteria should be a result acceptable with respect to design ultimate
loads. In the cases where test results show lower margins of safety, certification documentation
will need to be revised.
e. Other Considerations. For characteristics other than static strength (all those listed in
AC 20-107B, paragraphs 8, 9, 10, and 11), the substantiation should also ensure an equivalent
level of safety.
Page A3-4
