'i.,,' ' \ \(
Advisory
U.S. Department Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
DATE: March 29, 1988
NOTICE
RECENT ACCIDENTS INVOLVING LARGE TRANSPORT
AND SMALL GENERAL AVIATION AIRCRAFT HAS
PROMPTED THE FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION
TO RE-DISTRIBUTE AC 20-117, HAZARDS FOLLOWI~G
GROUND DEICING AND GROUND OPERATIONS IN
CONDITIONS CONDUCIVE TO AIRCRAFT ICING
DATED 12/17/82.
----------···--······· -----------------­
0 Advisory
U.S. Department Circular
of Transportation
Federal Aviation
Administration
CONSOLIDATED REPRINT
This consolidated reprint incorporatea
Chanae 1
Subject: HAZARDS FOI..I..CMING GROUND Date: 12/17/82 AC No: 20-117
DEICING AND GROUND OPERATIONS Initiated by: AWS-100 Change:
IN CDNDITIONS CX>NIXJCIVE 'IO
AIRCRAFI' ICING
1. PURPOSE. To emphasize the "Clean Aircraft Concept" foll<:Ming ground
operations in conditions conducive to aircraft icing and to provide information
to assist in compliance.
2. RELATED FEDERAL AVIATION REGULM'IONS (FAR) SECTIONS. Sections 121.629,
91.209, and 135.227.
3. BACKGROUND. Recent accidents involving large transport and small general
aviation aircraft indicate that misconceptions exist regarding the effect of
slight surface roughness caused by ice accumulations on aircraft performance and
flight characteristics and the effectiveness of Freezing Point Depressant (FPD)
ground deicing and anti-icing fluids. During developnent of information
contained herein it was recognized that guidance information should be directed
to all segments of aviation to include aircraft manufacturers; airline
--- engineering, maintenance, service and operations organizations; aircraft
maintenance and service personnel; and aircrews of all aircraft types and
categories. Information contained herein therefore is general in nature for
basic understanding p..irposes to facilitate developnent of standardized
procedures and guidance by various segments of the aviation industry. The FAA
will assist in developnent of specific industry standards and will p..iblish
additional advisory information as necessary.
4. DISCUSSION.
a. Regulations were established by the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) in
1950 prohibiting takeoff of aircraft when frost, snow, or ice is adhering to
wings, propellers, or control surfaces of the aircraft. These regulations
remain in effect as cited under FAR 121.629, 135.227, and 91.209. '!he basis of
these regulations, which are cx:moonly referred to as the clean aircraft concept,
is kn<:Mn degradation of aircraft performance and changes of aircraft flight
characteristics when ice formations of any type are present. 'lhese effects are
wide ranging, unpredictable, and dependent upon individual aircraft design. '!he
magnitude of these changes is dependent upon many variables and is thus
unpredictable, but these changes can be significant. Wind tunnel and flight
tests indicate that ice, frost, or snow formations on the leading edge and upper
surface of a wing, having a thickness and surface roughness similar to iredium ·or
coarse sandpaper, can reduce wing lift by as much as 30 percent and increase
drag by 40 percent. These changes in lift and drag will significantly increase
stall speed, reduce controllability and alter aircraft flight characteristics.
AC 20-117 12/ 17/82
Thicker or rougher ice accumulations in the form of frost, snow, or ice deposits
can have increasing effects on lift, drag, stall speed, stability, and control,
but the primary influence is surface roughness relative to critical portions of
an aerodynamic surface. It is therefore imperative that takeoff not be
attempted unless it has been ascertained, as req~ired by regulation, that all
critical components of the aircraft are free of adhering snow, frost, or other
ice formations.
b. Most transport aircraft used in a:::mnercial transportation as \1/ell as
sane other aircraft types are certificated for flight in icing conditions. It
is emphasized that to date rotorcraft and nost small, general aviation fixed
wing aircraft have not been certificated by the FAA for flight in icing
conditions. Aircraft so certificated have been designed and denonstrated to
have the capability of penetrating supercooled cloud icing conditions in the
forward flight regime. This capability is provided either by ice protection
equipnent installed on critical surfaces (usually the leading edge) or
demonstration that ice formed, under supercooled cloud icing conditions, on
certain unprotected components will oot significantly affect aircraft
performance, stability and control. Ice, frost, or snow formed on these
surfaces on the ground can have a totally different effect on aircraft flight
characteristics than ice formed in flight. Exposure to \\'leather conditions on
the ground that are conducive to ice formation can also cause accumulation of
frost, snow, or ice on ice protected areas of the aircraft that are designed for
inflight use only and that are oot designed for use during ground cperation. In
addition, aircraft are considered airworthy and are certificated by the FAA only
after extensive analyses and testing have been accorrplished. With the exception
of analyses and testing to ascertain the flight dlaracteristics of an aircraft
during flight in icing conditions, all analyses and certification testing are
conducted with a clean aircraft flying in a clean envirorunent. If ice
formations are present, other than those considered in the certification
process, the airworthiness of the aircraft may be invalid and oo attempt should
be made to fly the aircraft until it has been restored to the clean
configuration. The ultimate responsibility for this determination rests with
the pilot in carmand of the aircraft.
c. CCffll'Dn practice developed by the North .American and European aviation
carmunity over many years of cperational experience is to deice an aircraft
prior to takeoff. Various techniques of ground deicing were also developed.
The nost nodern of these techniques is use of FPO fluids to aid the ground
deicing process and to provide a protective film of FPO (anti-icing) to delay
formations of frost, snow, or other ice.
d. In scheduled airline cperations, where large ntnnbers of aircraft are
dispatched, the process of assuring airworthiness nust be a team effort where
each 11Ember of the team has specific duties an4 responsibilities. In the case
of private aircraft operations, all functions may be performed by only one
person, the pilot. Iri all cases, the pilot has the ultimate responsibility of
ascertaining that the aircraft is in a condition for safe flight.
e. The only method currently kn<,,,m of !X)Sitively ascertaining that an
aircraft is clean prior to takeoff is by close inspection. Under conditions of
precipitation or where noisture can be splashed, blown, or sublimated ooto
2 Par 4
12/17/S2
AC 20-117
critical surfaces in subfreezing weather, many factors influence whether ice,
frost, or snow may accumulate and result in surface roughness.
These variables are described in awendix 3 of this advisory circular (AC) but
·for convenience are listed as follows:
- Ambient Temperature
- Aircraft Surface Temperature
- Presence of Deicing Fluid
- Deicing Fluid Type
- Deicing Fluid l\gueous Solution (Strength)
- Precipitation Type and Rate
- Deicing Fluid Application Procedure
- Relative Humidity
- Solar Radiation
- Operation in Close Proximity to other Aircraft, Fquipnent, and Structures
- Operation on Snow, Slush, or Wet Surfaces
- Wind Velocity and Direction
- Aircraft Comp::>nent Inclination Angle, Contour, and Surface Roughness
f. Aircraft maintenance and q:,erations personnel neither have the
capability to quantify the occurrence or the effects of the many variables that
can influence whether ice, frost, or snow may form prior to takeoff, the surface
roughness of ice formations, nor the effect that surface roughness may have upon
aircraft performance and handling characteristics. Therefore, the time that may
be considered a safe interval between ground deicing and takeoff cannot be
estimated. Calculations of time incorp::>rating the effects of ooly a few of
these variables (e.g., ambient telti)erature of 20°F, fluid strength of 50
percent, precipitation rate of 1/2 inch/hour, assl.D'Tled water content of snow of
0.1, and assumed surface film thickness of FPO fluid of 0.1 nm) reveals that
-aircraft surfaces may remain free of ice formations (onset of FPO fluid
crystallization) for approximately 10 minutes. Other variables listed above
could reduce this time. Since neither the pilot in nor ground support
~
staffs have even these limited facts on hand, qu~titative judgements of time
available between the ground deicing or anti-icing process and takeoff cannot be
made.
g. The essence of flight safety following ground q:,erations in conditions
conducive to icing is the clean aircraft concept. To understand the need for
the clean aircraft concept requires thorough knowledge of: (1) The adverse
effects that ice, frost, or snow can have oo aircraft' performance and handling
Par 4
3
·--·..-·····--···---..;.;::==.-::::---::::::::===.;;:;=:::::::::""'..._'.:_'.:_::"._::~--:::::-_-:.::.::::::...--::=.=.=.=.=.:=...==-=-=-=-=-=.:;;-­
AC 20-117 12/17/82
qualities; (2) the various procedures that are available for aircraft grourrl
deicing and anti-icing: (3) the capabilities and limitations of these
procedures; (4) the variables that will influence the effectiveness of these
procedures; (5) the critical areas of the parti~-ular aircraft: and (6)
recognition that final assurance for a safe takeoff rests in pretakeoff
inspection. Additional informa.tion to assist in developnent of this
understanding and knowledge may be found in the appendices of this K'.. The
success of the aviation corrrnunity to date is attributed to many years of
experience oo the part of many oorrpanies where this knowledge has been gained,
through experience, and passed oo in the form of policy_, procedures, quality
assurance programs, and training programs.
5. /CCEPI'ABLE PRACTICF.S.
a. General. The clean aircraft ooncept is essential. The FAR makes the
clean aircraft ooncept law. This law exists for flight safety reasons. The FAR
states a general requirement but allows operators to corrply with the requirement
in an appropriate manner, depending upon local circl.UllStances. The clean
aircraft ooncept has been in effect since 1950. Many techniques of corrplying
with the clean aircraft ooncept have been developed over the years by the
aviation industry. Many of these techniques were developed prior to 1950
because of the need recognized by the aviation comnunity. The oonsensus of the
aviation comnunity and the oonclusion readied by the FAA is that the ooly method
of assuring flight safety following grourrl operations in oonditions oonducive to
aircraft icing, is by either close inspection prior to takeoff to ascertain that
critical aircraft components are clean {free of ice, frost, or snow forma.tions)
or a determination that any formations are oot adhering to critical surfaces and
will blow off in the early stages of takeoff roll. This oonsensus is valid
regardless of the use of C\lrrently available FPO deicing fluids or the use of
manual tedlniques of deicing. FPO fluids comronly used today should oot be
considered to have anti-icing qualities for a finite period of time because a
multitude of variables make it impractical to estimate that time. However,
under certain oondition FPO fluids are known to be effective in retarding the
formation of frost, snow, or ice and in this sense may be oonsidered to have
anti-icing qualities {to prevent the formation of ice) for a period of time
during ground storage (overnight or during brief layover) thus making the
process of deicing (removing ice formations) simpler and in many cases l"W:?gating
further deicing or treatment. It is erphasized, however, that the l"W:?ed for close
inspection prior to takeoff remains. The following paragraphs are intended to
provide suggested methods of assuring the clean aircraft ooncept.
(1) Aircraft _Deici!19 and Anti-Ici!}g.
(i) An airplane may be cleaned of ice forma.tions {deiced) by any
suitable manual method, by use of water, by use of FPO fluids, or mixtures of
FPO fluids and water. To date manufacturers of rotorcraft have oot awroved use
of FPO fluids for application to rotorcraft. Heated water, FPO fluids or
aqueous solutions of FPO fluids are nore effectiv~ in the deicing process. The
deicing and anti-icing process may be performed in ooe stage or nultiple stage
processes as desired depending upon prevailing oonditions, concentration of FPO
utilized, facilities available and deicing methods. In any case the freeze
point of residual fluids (water, FPO fluids or mixtures) should oot be greater
than 20°F below ambient or surface temperature whichever is less. Unheated FPO
4 Par 4
12/17/82
AC 20-117
fluids or aqueous solutions are nore effective in the anti-icing process than
heated fluids.
(ii) In conditions of freezing precipitation or high humidity when
aircraft surface temperatures are near or below freezing and when it cannot be
determined that snow or other ice crystal accumulations are oot ~hering and
will blow off during initial stages of takeoff, surfaces should be anti-iced to
retard the formation of ice prior to takeoff.
(iii) FPO freeze EX)int can be determined using refractive index
techniques. FPO fluid manufacturers can suggest or supply suitable equipnent.
(iv) Critical surface terrperatures under many ciretm1Stances are
found in the vicinity of integral wing fuel tanks. When fuel temperatures are
higher than ambient, critical surface terrperatures will occur at other
locations. These temperatures can be determined by direct maasurement or by
estimating fuel terrperature. If surface terrperature is oot measured or
estimated then the freeze EX)int of residual fluids should be the lowest EX)Ssible
with available fluids.
(v) In conditions of oonprecipitation an anti-iced aircraft
should be closely inspected to assure the freeze EX)int of residual fluids remain
20°F below ambient or surface terrperature whichever is lower. This is
especially important when relative humidity is high.
(vi) Underwing frost should be renoved and, where practical, the
surface anti-iced to delay re-formation of frost. See appendix 3 for ~itional
information on this subject.
(2) Preflight Inspection. Preflight inspection should be performed
inrrediately following or during the ground deicing and anti-icing process.
Areas to be inspected depend upon the aircraft design and should be identified
in an inspection checklist. The inspection checklist should include all items
reccmnended by the aircraft manufacturer and may be supplemented, as necessary,
to include special operational considerations, but this checklist should
include the following general items:
- Wing leading edges, upper surfaces, and lower surfaces
- Stabilizing device leading edges, upper surfaces, lower surfaces,
and side panels
- High lift devices such as leading edge slats and leading or
trailing edge flaps
- Wing lift spoilers
- All control surfaces and control balance bays
- Propellers
- Rotor Blades, rotor heads and controls
Par 5 5
12/17/82
AC 20-117
- Critical rotor system devices such as droop stops
- Engine inlets, particle separators and screens
- Windshields and other transparencies necessary for vasibility
- Antennas
- Fuselage sections forward of stabilizing, control and lifting
surfaces, propellers, rotors, or engine air inlets
- Exposed instrumentation devices such as angle-of-attack vanes,
pitot-static pressure probes, and static ports
- Fuel tank and fuel cap vents
- Cooling and .APU air intakes/inlets/exhausts
- Undercarriage
(3) Once it has been determined through pre-flight inspection that
the aircraft is clean and adequately protected, the aircraft should be released
for takeoff as soon as possible. This is especially irrportant in oonditions of
precipitation or high relative humidity.
(4) Pretakeoff Inspection.
(i) Fixed Wing_Aircraft
(A) Just prior to taking the active runway for takeoff or just
prior to initiating takeoff roll, a visual pretakeoff inspection should be ma.de.
The <XJ11)0nents to be inspected depend upon aircraft design. In sane aircraft,
the entire wing, and p::>rtions of the enpennage are visible from the oockpit or
the cabin. In other aircraft, these surfaces are so rexrote that only p::>rtions
of the upper surface of the wings are in view. Undersurfaces of wings and
undercarriage are oot viewable in any but high-wing type aircraft. A practice
in use by sane operators is to perform close visual inspection of wing surfaces,
leading edges, engine inlets, and other coop::,nents of the aircraft that are in
view either £ran the oockpit or cabin (whichever provides maximum view}. If
surfaces have oot been treated with FPD fluid, evidence of melting snow and
possible freezing is sought. Also evidence of any ice formation that may have
been induced by taxi operations is sought. Ii the aircraft has been treated
with FPD fluids, evidence of a glossy snooth and wet surface is sought. If, as
a result of these inspections, evidence of ice, snow, or frost formations is
observed, the aircraft should be returned to a maintenance area for additional
deicing.
(B) The fact that it is impractical for an aircraft crewmember
to disanbark at the end of a runway and perform pretakeoff inspections, means
that the crewmember should perform that inspection from the best vantage p::>int
available fran within the aircraft. The crewmember may elect to q:,en windows,
doors, or hatches to improve the view, but in many aircraft even this is
impractical. In the darkness of night the crewmember nust rely l.lfX)n wing and
6 Par 5
12/17/82 AC 20-117
other aircraft illumination lights that ma.y oot provide sufficient reflection to
make appropriate visual observations. The crewmember ma.y, where practical, call
upon the assistance of qualified ground personnel. If under any circumstance,
the pilot in carmand cannot ascertain that the aircraft is clean, takeoff should
not be attempted.
(C) Conducting pretakeoff inspection in the ma.nner described
relies upon the pilot in camiand to be knowledgeable of ground deicing
procedures, that the ground deicing process was conducted in a thorough and
unifoi::m ma.nner, and that critical surfaces or can.ponents oot in view during
pretakeoff inspection will also be clean. The decision to takeoff, following
pretakeoff inspection remains the responsibility of the pilot in ccmnan.d.
(ii) Rotorcraft.
(A) Only rotorcraft that have been certificated for flight in
1c1ng conditions should be operated in conditions conducive to icing such as
freezing fog. To date oone have been so certificated by the FAA.
(B) Rotorcraft certificated for flight in falling and blowing
snow ma.y operate in such conditions. In this case pretakeoff inspection of
rotor systems should be conducted just prior to starting rotors turning. Rotor
systems should oot be started unless blade surfaces and other critical
canponents are free of ice, frost or oohering snow.
b. Ccmoon practices or suggested practices necessary to assure the pilot
has every advantage for his judgements:
(1) Establish training programs to continually update pilots on the
hazards of winter operations, adverse effects of ice formations on aircraft
perfoi::mance and flight characteristics, proper use of ice protection equipnent,
ground deicing and anti-icing procedures, and preflight and pretakeoff
inspection procedures following ground deicing or anti-icing and operations in
conditions conducive to aircraft icing.
(2) Establish training programs for ma.intenance or other personnel who
perfotm aircraft deicing to assure thorough knowledge of the ooverse effects of
ice formations on aircraft performance and flight characteristics, critical
canp:>nents and specific ground deicing and anti-icing procedures for each
aircraft type, and the use of ground deicing and anti-icing equipnent including
detection of abnormal operational conditions.
(3) Establish quality assurance programs to assure that FPD fluids
being p.irchased and used are of the proper characteristics, that proper ground
deicing and anti-icing procedures are utilized, that all critical areas are
inspected, and that all critical cnnponents of the aircraft are clean prior to
departure.
(4) Perfoi::m thorough planning of ground deicing activities to assure
that proper supplies and equipnent are available for forecast weather conditions
and that responsibilities are specifically assigned and understcx:rl. This is to
include ma.intenance service contracts.
Par 5 7
AC 20-117 12/17/82
(5) Monitor weather oonditions very closely to assure that planning
information remains valid during the ground deicing or anti-icing process and
subsequent aircraft operations. FPD fluids, deicing or anti-icing procedures
and departure plans should be altered acoordingly.
(6) Use FPD ooncentrations that will delay ice formations for as long
a period as p::>ssible under the prevailing oonditions.
(7) Deice or anti-ice areas that may be viewed by the pilot (from
inside the aircraft) first so that during pretakeoff inspection he may have
assurance that other areas of the aircraft are clean since areas deiced or
anti-iced first will generally freeze first.
(8) Use the two-stage deicing process where ice dep::>sits are first
removed, and then all critical CX>JJp:>nents of the aircraft are ooated with an
appropriate mixture of FPD fluid (anti-icing) to prolong effectiveness.
(9) Assure thorough ooordination of the ground deicing and anti-icing
process so that final treatments are provided just prior to takeoff.
(10) Use remote sites near the take-off p::>sition, where feasible, for
deicing or anti-icing to reduce the time between deicing and takeoff or to
provide additional FPD fluid to prolong anti-icing effectiveness.
(11) Use multiple aircraft deicing or anti-icing units for faster and
more uniform treatment during precipitation.
(12) Use FPO fluids that are approved for use by the aircraft
manufacturer. sane fluids may not be compatible with aircraft materials and
finishes and some may have dlaracteristics that impair aircraft performance and
flight dlaracteristics or cause oontrol surface instabilities.
(13) Do not use substances that are approved for use on pneumatic
bcx>ts (to improve deicing performance) for other prqx:>ses unless such uses are
approved by the aircraft manufacturer.
c. Suggested practices for pilots to assure the clean aircraft ooncept.
(1) Be knowledgeable of the adverse effects of surface roughness on
aircraft performance and flight dlaracteristics.
(2) Be knowledgeable of ground deicing and anti-icing practices and
procedures being used on your aircraft whether this service is being performed
by your own canpany, a service oontractor, or a fixed-base operator.
(3) Do not allow deicing or anti-icing until you are familiar with the
ground deicing practices and quality oontrol procedures of the service
organization.
(4) Be knowledgeable of critical areas of your aircraft and assure
these areas are properly deiced and anti-iced, proper precautions are being
taken during the deicing process to avoid damage to aircraft CX>JJp:>nents, and
8 Par 5
12/17/82
AC 20-117
proper preflight inspections are performed even though this is also the
resp::>nsibility of other organizations or personnel.
(5) Be knowledgeable of ice protection system function, capabilities,
limitations, and q;>eration.
(6) Perform additional preflight inspections related to deicing or
'·. anti-icing as necessary or required.
(7) Be aware that no one can accurately determine the time of
effectiveness of an FPD deicing or anti-icing treatment because of the many
variables that can influence this time.
(8) Be knowledgeable of the variables that can reduce time of
effectiveness and their general effects.
(9) Assure that deicing or the anti-icing treatment is performed at the
last p::>ssible time prior to taxi to the takeoff p::>sition.
(10) Do not start engines, propellers, or rotor blades until it has
been ascertained that all ice dep::>sits are rerroved. Ice particles shed fran
rotating canponents under centrifugal and aerodynamic forces can be lethal.
(11) Be aware that certain q;>erations may produce recirculation of ice
crystals, snow or rroisture.
(12) Be aware that q;>erations in close proximity to other aircraft can
induce snow, other ice particles, or rroisture to be blown onto critical
aircraft canponents, or allow dry snow to rrelt and refreeze.
(13) Do not takeoff if snow or slush is observed splashing onto
critical areas of the aircraft, such as wing leading edges, during taxi.
(14) Always perform pretakeoff inspections just prior to takeoff.
(15) Do not takeoff if p::>sitive evidence of a clean aircraft cannot be
ascertained.
Director of Airworthiness, AWS-1
Par 5 9
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 1
.APPENDIX 1. RELA1'EO FAA PUBLIC1(J.1I00S, TRAINIOO MATERIAL, .AND Ol'HER READIOO
MM"ERIAL
1. REI.Ja'ED FAA PUBLICATIOOS.
-- Air Carrier Operations Bulletin (llC:OB), No. 7-81-1, Aircraft Deicing
and Anti-Icing Procedures, dated April 10, 1981, ror/FAAOrder 8430.17,
Change 21.
- N:OB, No. 7-76-9, Aircraft Control and Lifting Surfaces-cold weather
Operations, October 20, 1976.
-- N:OB, No. 7-76-11, Engine Ice Accumulation - Ground Idle (Formerly Air
Carrier Operations Alert, No. 70-9), October 20, 1976.
-- N:OB, No. 7-76-12, Turbojet Aircraft Engine Icing During Prolonged
Ground Operations in Icing Conditions (Formerly Air Carrier Operations Alert
No. 69-3), October 20, 1976.
-- Kll3, No. 7-76-13, Takeoff warning Systems During Cold weather
Operations, October 20, 1976.
-- N:OB, No. 7-76-2, water/Snow Entering Parked Boeing 727 Aircraft
Causing Electrical Fewer wss, October 20, 1976.
-- ACOB, No. 7-76-1, Winter Operations Under FAR 121 and 127 (Formerly Air
Carrier Operations Bulletin No. 68-15), October 20, 1976.
-- Air Carrier Operations Alert (JICOA), No. 67-3, Aircraft Control and Lift
Surfaces - Cold weather Operations.
-- KJJA No. 69-3, Turbojet Aircraft Engine Icing During Prolonged Ground
Operations in Icing Conditions.
-- JICOA No. 70-9, Engine Ice Accumulation - Ground Idle.
--Air Carrier Maintenance Bulletin (J.\CMB) No. 115, Deicing of Aircraft
with Engines Operating.
-- .1CMB 127, Aircraft Deicer Fluids.
-- .ACMB 128, Responsibility for Aircraft Servicing.
-- .ACMB 155, Winter Operation of Aircraft.
-- IC 00-6A, Aviation Weather, March 3, 1975.
-- IC 00-458, Aviation Weather Services, 1979.
-- IC 20-73, Aircraft Ice Protection, 11;>ril 21, 1971.
-- IC 20-93, Flutter Due to Ice or Foreign Substance On Or In Aircraft
Control Surfaces, January 29, 1976.
Par 1
1
12/ 17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 1
- JtC 20-113, Pilot Precautions and procedures to l:::le taken in Preventing
Aircraft Reciprocating Engine Induction System & Fuel System Icing Problems,
Oct. 22, 1981.
-- JtC 20-106, Aircraft Inspection for the General Aviation Aircraft Owner,
April 1978.
- JtC 61-84A, '!he Role of Preflight Preparation, December 1, 1980.
-- JtC 91-6A, water, Slush, and Snow on the Runway, May 24, 1978.
-- JtC 91-13C, Cold weather Operation of Aircraft, July 24, 1979.
-- JtC 91-51, Airplane Deice and Anti-Ice Systems, September 15, 1977.
-- 11C 135-9, FAR Part 135 Icing Limitations, May 30, 1981.
-- JtC 121-12, Wet or Sli~ry R.Jnways, August 17, 1967.
-- JtC 150/5380-4, Ranp Operations During Perioos of Ice and Snow
Accumulations, September 11, 1968.
-- FAA RD-80-50, Engine Inlet Anti-Icing System Evaluation Procedure
(Report).
-- M:;F 140-75-3, Report of Propulsion Conference and Environmental
Workshop.
-- Aircraft Ice Protection, Report of Synposium, Jpril 28-30, 1969.
-- FAA General Aviation News Article "Rime Without Reason."
-- FAA Pamphlet ''Weather (Pilot's) How It Is Forecast."
-- FAA Pamphlet "'!be Weather Decision."
2. TRAINING MATERIAL.
-- 11C 61-80, Instrument Rating, Written Test Guide.
-- JtC 61-18B, Air Transport Pilot (Airplane, written test guide).
-- 11C 61-21A, Flight Training Handbook.
-- 11C 61-23B, Pilots Handbook of Aeronautical Knowledge.
-- 11C 61-31B, Gyroplane Pilot Written Test Guide, Private and COllll\ercial.
-- 11C 61-70A, Flight Instructor, Instrument Airplane, Written Test Guide.
-- JtC 61-71B, Catrnercial Pilot - Airplane - Written Test Guide.
Par 1
2
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 1
- PC 61-72B, Flight Instructor -­ Airplane - written Test Guide.
-- PC 61-73A, Private.& Camiercial Pilot Rotorcraft Helioopter written Test
Guide.
-- PC 61-74A, Flight Instructor - Rotorcraft, Helioopter written Test
Guide.
-- PC 61-75A, Flight Instructor - Glider written Test Guide.
-- PC 61-81A, Private & Ccmnercial Pilot - Glider - written Test Guide.
-- Exam-0-Gram N\mlber 21, "Flying Into Unfavorable Weather."
-- Exam-0-Gram N\mlber 28, "Factors Affecting Stall Speed."
-- DOD (USN) Film, "Ice Formation On Aircraft."
-- FM. Film, "sane Thoughts on Winter Flying."
-- FM. Slide Presentation, "Fog, Stratus, and Icing."
-- FM. Slide Presentation, "Thunderstorms and Turbulence."
-- DOD Training Circular, N\mlber 1-12, "Cold Weather Flying S~nse,"
January 1978.
3. Ol'HER RELM'ED INFORMM'ION.
-- SAE, AMS 1425A, Deicing/Anti-Icing Fluid, Aircraft, Ethylene Glycol Base.
-- SAE, AIR-1335, Ramp Deicing.
-- FM. Film, "The Cold Front."
-- FM. Film, "The Warm Front."
-- PDPA Article, "The Icing Options," KJPA Pilot, September 1981.
-- Wing Surface Roughness, cause, and Effect by Ralph E. Brumby, Principal
Engineer Aerodynamics p..iblished in Issue No. 32 of DC Flight Approach, January
1979.
- Methods of Prediction of the Influence of Ice on Aircraft Flying
Characteristics by M. Ingelman Sundberg, O. K. Trunov, and A. Ivaniko; a joint
report fran the Swedish-Soviet ii)rking Group on Scientific-Technical Cooperation
in the Field of Flight Safety, Report No. JR-1, 1977.
-- Wind Tunnel Investigations of the Hazardous Tail Stall Due to Icing by
M. Ingelman-Sunberg and O. K. Truoov; a joint report from the Swedish-Soviet
Working Group on Scientific-Technical Cooperation in the Field of Flight
Safety, Report No. JR-2, 1979.
Par 2 3
AC 20-117 12/17/82
Appendix 1
- A Study of Sane Methods and Means for Protecting Aircraft Against Ground
Icing by o. K. Trunov and T. Aaro; a joint re[X>rt from the Swedish-Soviet
Working Group on Scientific-Technical Cooperation in the Field of Flight Safety,
Re[X)rt No. JR-4, 1980.
-- Roughness Penalties for Flight Simulators, P. Haines and J. K. IJ.Jers,
University of Dayton Research Institute, Dayton, Ohio, presented to the AI.AA
20th .Aerospace Sciences Meeting, January 11-14, 1982, Orlando, Florida.
-- 737 Wing Leading Edge Condition published in July-September 1981 issue
of Boeing Airliner Magazine.
-- 737 Wing Leading Edge Condition - Part II, published in the
October-December 1981 issue of Boeing Airliner Magazine.
-- Mirabel Deicing Project 1978-1979, Airports and Construction Services
Directorate, Airport Facilities Branch, Trans,EX>rt Canada, Air, le,EX>rt No. TR
2159, May 1979.
-- Cold Weather Operations, Frank J. B~Hand, published in the
October-December 1982 issue of Boeing Airliner Magazine.
-- Reccmnendations for DE-ICING/.ANI1I-ICING of Aircraft oo Ground,
~sociation of European Airlines, October 1982.
-- Air Dynamic Effects of Deicing/Anti-icing Fluids, Service Letter, Boeing
Canrcerical Airplane Coopany, December 2, 1982.
-- Ground Deicing and Anti-icing of Aircraft, Douglas Service,
September/October 1982.
4 Par 3
12/17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 2
APPENDIX 2. METHOil:> OF ESTIMATING FREEZING POINI' DEPRESSANT (FPD) FLUID
EFFECTIVENESS •
.1 . GENERAL. Many variables can influence the time of the effectiveness of
freezing point depressant (FPO) fluids, as discussed in appendix 3 of this
advisory circular (PC) , that make it inpractical, if oot impossible, to estimate
that time follOW'ing deicing or anti-icing processes. HOW'ever, during efforts to
ascertain whether or oot accurate estimates could be made, mathematical
relationships were developed to allOW' estimates to be made using only a few
known or assumed parameters. 'Ibis appendix C'Ontains the rationale for these
mathematical relationships only for the :µ.irpose of providing the basis of
estimates presented in the body and appendix 3 of this PC. It is emphasized
that the mathematical relationships derived herein are an cwersinplification of
the problem. Extreme caution is emphasized that these relationships not be used
for estimating time available between deicing and takeoff or as a substitute for
the clean aircraft concept or pretakeoff inspections.
2. RM'IONALE. To estimate the time of effectiveness of FPO fluids in
conditions of precipitation, several parameters JlUSt be known or assumed. To
sinplify this rationalization, figure 2-1 depicts a segment of a surface
containing a film of FPD fluid of a certain depth ~f), and of a certain
mixture M1 (% by weight of FPO in water). '!his fluid will freeze (begin to
crystallize) at a given fluid temperature (tf) when its mixture (M2)
reaches the freeze point (onset of crystallization). That is to say that at a
given tf an c:rlditional arrount of water nust be mixed with the FPO fluid to
further dilute the mixture to M2. Precipitation in the fonn of snOW', sleet,
hail, freezing rain or drizzle or any other source of water such as dew, frost,
spraying, and/or splashing can dilute the FPO mixture. If the rate of c:rldition
of water is knOW'n (Rw) the time to reach M2 can be estimated.
,,11, ',','1'11,1
I I I
PNcipltation
1
I I I
1 I I
I 1'11'11'1
11 I
-
FIWRE 2-1
Par 1 1
12/17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 2
To further simplify this rationalization, figure 2-2 depicts schematically the
relationships of the various parameters.
T
6a
J_
T
6rw
T
6t
l
l
FIGURE 2-2
we..:
6t - Original fluid flm thlckneN
6g • Ouentity of FOP fluid (glycol) In the FPO/water mixture
6fw • Ouentity of water In the original FPD/WllbN' mixture
6a • The quantity of Wllt9r needed 10 further dHute the mixture
M1 and M2 can then be calculated as follows: ·
M1 = Is the percentage of FPO in the mixture
-
~
8f
M - 8a - ___6 .a.__
s•
a. a .s
2 8 + + +
1 1 • 0
Par 2
2
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 2
..
a. F.r.an _th_is
.
m
,
lationahip the am::,unt of water needed to be added to the
.
FPD fluid mixture can be deter:mined sincie:
Mi
6a - ¥11
...
.. -~- -..
...., _.,
~-}
1
MJ MJ \~
b. If a rate of ~ition of water (Rw) is known, the time (T) required
to add the aroount of water can be estimated:
c. For exanple calculatioo assume:
df = 0.1 mm
R = 1.0 in/hour
8
=
Rw .1 ~- 0.1 in/hour
M1 = 90% ethylene glycol
=
t +20°F
8
d. Under these assumptions M2 can be determined by referring to the
phase diagram (figure 3-1, appendix 3) and at 20°F it can be seen that the
mixture of ethylene glycol that will begin to freeze at 20°F is 16%.
Therefore, M2 = 0.16 and under the above assumptions, time can be estimated
as follows:
T• 0,1 nvn 0.8 ~
--1
(
0.1 In/hr 0.18
.2:1) (.2:!-1)
(
• 2.38 • 10.11 min
0.1 0.18
Par 2 3
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
APPENDIX 3. GENERAL INFORMM'IOO RELATING 'ID GROUND AND FLIGEfr OPERATIONS IN
CONDITIONS CCJNIXx::IVE 'ID AIRCRAFT ICING.
1. INl'K)DUCTIOO. This advisory circular (AC) deals with the hazards follCMing
ground deiclrigand ground operations in conditions conducive to aircraft icing.
This appendix provides general infonnation necessary for the c,,,erall
understanding of these hazards and includes causes and effects of ice fonnations
(induced on the ground or in flight) as well as ground related issues such as:
methods of ground deicing, capabilities and limitations of freezing ix>int
depressant (FPO) ground deicing fluids, and discussions of variables that can
influence the effectiveness of ground deicing fluids.
2. ~ITIONS C'ONIXx::IVE 'ID AIRCRAFT ICING.
a. Aircraft oo the ground or in flight are susceptible to acclllll.Ulation of
ice fonnations under various atmospheric and q,erational conditions. Aircraft
in-flight can encounter a variety of atmospheric conditions that will
individually or in (X)l'llbination produce ice fonnations oo various conponents of
the aircraft. These conditions include:
(1) Supercooled Clouds. Clouds containing water droplets (belCM 32°F)
that have remained in the liquid state. Supercooled water droplets will freeze
U{X)n impact with another d:>ject. Water droplets can remain in the liquid state
at ambient temperatures as lCM as -40°F. The rate of ice accretion oo an
aircraft cxxnponent is dependent l.lfX)n many factors such as droplet size cloud
liquid water content, ambient temperature, and conponent size, shape, and
velocity.
(2) Ice Crystal Clouds. Clouds existing usually at very cold
temperatures where noisture has frozen to the solid or crystal state.
(3) Mixed Conditions. Clouds at ambient terrperatures belCM 32°F
containing a mixture of ice crystals and supercooled water droplets.
(4) Freezing Rain and Drizzle. Precipitation existing within clouds
or belCM cloud.s at ambient tenperatures belCM 32°F where rain droplets remain in
the supercooled liquid state.
(5) Frozen precipitation such as snCM, sleet, or hail.
b. Aircraft on the ground, during ground storage or ground q,erations, are
susceptible to many of the conditions that can be encountered in flight in
addition to conditioos peculiar to ground q,erations. These include:
(1) Supercooled ground fog and ice clouds.
(2) Operation on ramps, taxiways, and runways containing noisture,
slush, or snow.
(3) Bl<:Mn snow fran snow drifts, other aircraft, buildings, or other
ground structures.
Par 1 1
12/17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 3
(4) Snow blown by ambient winds, other aircraft, or ground support
equiµrent.
(5) Recirculated srx::,w made airborne by engine, propeller, or rotor
wash. Operation of jet engines in reverse thrust, reverse pitch propellers, and
helicopter rotor blades are conm::>n causes of snow recirculation.
(6) Conditions of high relative humidity that may produce frost
formations on aircraft surfaces having a ten:perature at or below the frost
point. Frost accumulations are conm::>n during overnight ground storage and after
landing where aircraft surface ten:peratures remain cold following descent from
higher altitudes. This is a conm::>n occurrence on lower wing surfaces in the
vicinity of fuel cells. Frost formations can also occur on upper wing surfaces
in contact with cold fuel.
3. THE EFFECTS OF ICE, SN:M,_AND FK>ST FO~IONS ON AIRCRAFI' PERFORMANCE AND
FLIGHT CHARN:TEIUSTICS
a. General. During flight operations ice will form oo leading edges of
various canponents, within forward facing air intakes (e.g., engine inlets) and
frontal areas of the airframe. During ground storage or operations, ice will
form on other i;:x:>rtions of aircraft conponents such as upper surfaces of wings,
fuselages, engine nacelles, horizontal stabilizer surfaces, and control
surfaces. The effects that inflight or ground accreted ice formations will have
on aircraft performance and flight dlaracteristics are many, are varied and are
highly dependent upon aircraft design, ice surface roughness, ice shape, and
areas covered. These effects will generally be reflected in the form of
decreased thrust, decreased lift, increased drag, increased stall speed, trim
changes, and altered stall dlaracteristics and handling qualities. Slight
weight increases will also occur, however, the effect of weight increase (with
the exception of heavy srx::,w and freezing rain dei;:x:>sits during ground operations)
is usually insignificant in con:parision to aerodynamic degradation.
b. Aircraft Certification for Flight in Icing Conditions.
(1) Most comnercial transi;:x:>rt aircraft and many other aircraft types
are designed for safe flight in rrost atioospheric icing conditions that can be
encountered in conventional flight; i.e., from takeoff to landing. They are not
certificated for takeoff or flight with ice formed as a result of ground storage
9r operations. Such formations nust be re100ved and the aircraft sustained in a
clean configuration prior to initiation of takeoff and throughout the takeoff
roll. Although several helicopters are rx::,w in the initial :i;nases of icing
certification, no comnercial helicopters are currently certificated for flight
in icing conditions. Only a small number of helicopters have been certificated
for flight in falling or blowing snow. Before an aircraft is certificated to
fly in atioospheric conditions conducive to icing, that capability must be
demonstrated to the FAA. This is accorrplished through extensive analyses and
flight testing. If an aircraft is rot so certificated, it should rot be
intentionally flown in atm::;>spheric icing conditions. Aircraft that are
certificated for flight in icing conditions are equipped with ice protection
systems to reduce the adverse effects of ice formations, either by preventing
the formation of ice (anti-icing) or by periodically re100ving ice (deicing).
Sane carq;x:>nents of sane aircraft certificated for flight in icing conditions ck>
2 Par 2
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
not require ice protection equipnent. Aircraft so certificated have been
demonstrated to be capable of safe flight with ice of certain shapes adhering to
critical areas. Aircraft c-ertificated for flight in icing conditions are
capable of sustained q;>erations in supercooled cloud conditions. Their engines
arrl engine inlets are capable of q;>eration without serious perfonnance
degradation in supercooled clouds. Sane aircraft may have limited capability
for flight in freezing rain and drizzle, in mixed conditions or p..ire ice crystal
clouds, however, ice protection systems are certificated only for operation
urrler the supercooled· cloud conditions ooted in paragraiil 2a( 1) al:ove. Small
aircraft are generally less tolerant to freezing rain conditions than large
aircraft.
(2) Many aircraft in service today (generally small aircraft) have ice
protection equipnent installed, but are oot c-ertificated for flight in icing
conditions. Aircraft of this type have only been dem::>nstrated to show the
equipnent is oonhazardous for flight in oonicing conditions with the equipnent
installed. Aircrews should be aware of tqese limitations and be cautious
because this type of equipnent may oot provide safe flight during icing
encounters.
(3) Many aircraft in servic-e today (generally large aircraft) are
permitted by maintenance manuals to be dispatched for flight with slight anounts
of frost adhering to fuel tank areas of wing undersurfac-es. Maintenance manuals
of such aircraft specify limits of frost thickness (generally between 1/8" and
3/8") depending UfX)n the aircraft characteristics. It is emphasized that this
practice is based UfX)n operational experienc-e only and oo FAA certification or
other test data has verified the accuracy of these limits. Operational
experience as well as research experiments indicate that underwing frost
formations do oot generally influence aircraft perfonnance and flight
characteristics as severely as leading edge and upper wing frost; however, some
wing designs may be nore sensitive to underwing frost than others.
c. Effects of Ice Formations
(1) Wind tunnel and flight testing conducted in the past under
research, developnent, and certification efforts, as well as q;>erational
experience, have shown that ice formations on various aircraft components can
have very significant and sometimes devastating effects on aircraft equipnent
operation, aircraft performance, and flight characteristics. Components of an
aircraft normally affected by ire formations are highly dependent UfX)n aircraft
design, however, they generally fall in the following categories: lifting
devices; stabilizing devices; control surfaces; engine inlets; engines;
propellers; rotor blades; anti-torque devices; windshields and other transparent
structures; cooling air inlets; fuselage sections; antennas; undercarriage
devices; fuel cap vents; and fuel tank vents.
(2) The effects of ice formations on some of these components and the
contribution to degradation of aircraft perfonnance and flight characteristics
are itemized in the following list:
(i) Slight surfac-e roughness can have significant effects on stall
speed and power required to achieve or to sustain flight.
Par 3 3
AC 20-117 12/17/82
Appendix 3
(ii) Surface roughness oo the aftertx>dy of a wing can have an effect
awroximately equal to the effect of similar surface roughness on the leading
edge oo sane airfoils. Leading edge surface roughness is Il'Ore significant on
most airfoils.
(iii) Increased surface roughness, due to ice formation, on wing
leading edges and afterbodies will produce cd:litional drag and further reduce
lift.
(iv) Due to increased stall speed, maneuvers should be Il'Ore gentle
and airspeed margin during approach should be increased.
(v) Stall angle-of-attack will decrease and in sane aircraft
stall will occur prior to activation of stall warning devices.
(vi) Stall characteristics will dlange and, depending upon
aircraft design, the nature of ice formations can cause either violent stall or
a sl<Mer progression of stall. In sane aircraft pitch-up tendencies may be
greater and roll-off tendencies can be exaggerated.
(vii) Controllability may be reduced requiring Il'Ore stick
deflection for maneuvers or stall recovery.
(viii) Power available may be reduced due to ice formations oo
prq>ellers or jet engine inlets.
(ix) Ice or excessive quantities of FPD fluid have been known to
cause control surface flutter.
(x) Trim effectiveness can deteriorate with the accumulation of
ice on unprotected surfaces.
(xi) Power failures may occur due to carburetor icing or ingestion
of ice particles into jet engines or clogging of fuel tank vents and fuel caps.
(xii) Severe vibrations may occur due to asymretric shedding of ice
fran prq>ellers or rotor blades. Helicopter autorotation capability can be
significantly changed or lost.
(xiii) Control surfaces such as ailerons, elevators, and wing
spoilers can freeze in place if water deposits, snow, and FPD fluids are oot
properly cleaned or drained fran critical areas.
(xiv) Wing flaps may be damaged if retracted with ice formations
adhering to critical areas.
(xv) Landing gear nechanisrns may be damaged or frozen in place if
not prq>erly cleared of ice formations.
(xvi) Forward visibility may be lost or significantly reduced if
windshield anti-icing systems are oot available or are oot properly utilized.
4 Par 3
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
(xvii) Radio, radar, and other c:annunication and navigation antennas
may be damaged or efficiency reduced due to ice formations.
(xviii) Ventilation, air conditioning, and other air inlets can be
blocked or flCM restricted.
(xiv) Ice dislodged fran fuselage sections, antennas and other
canponents forward of engine inlets and other critical corrp::,nents can produce
damage.
(xx) Ice formations, under certain conditions, may oot have
noticeable effects on aircraft performance and flight characteristics, however,
these effects may becane quite ai;;parent in the event of engine failure or other
emergencies.
(xxi) Flight, engine, and other instruments are subject to error if
ice formations exist on external probes, in pressure lines, or on areas forward
of or crljacent to external probes. Operational experience indicates that
typical sources of error are icing of pitot-static probes used for airspeed,
altitude, and engine pressure ratio measurements.
(xxii) Autanatic systems that utilize external signal sources such
as AFCS, auto-pilots, autothrottle speed coomand systems, or stability
augmentation systems may be crlversely affected~ ice formations oo or in the
vicinity of external sensors.
(xxiii) Residual rroisture oo door and cargo hatch seals may freeze
under certain conditions causing leaks or seal damage.
4. METHODS OF DEICING OR CLEANING ICE FIOt AIRCRAFT SURFfCF§.
a. Ground deicing procedures have been under developnent, practically
speaking, since the time of the invention of the aircraft. Early methods
enployed the use of hangars to avoid exposure to the elements or use of wing
covers and covers for other critical o::>rrp:>nents such as windshields, engine air
intakes, pitot probes, etc. But these devices were useful ooly to lessen the
extent of work required to reioove frost, snow, or other ice formations from the
aircraft. Various devices such as brcxxns, brushes, ropes, squeegees, fire
hoses, or other devices were used to rerrove dry snow accumulations but caution
hcrl to be exercised to preclude damage to aircraft skins and other critical
canponents. Ccmron sense prevailed. Many of these manual methods are still used
today for both small and large aircraft. As larger aircraft were introduced and
the numbers of air carrier fleets and scheduled flights increased, more
expeditious and less costly procedures were developed. Thus, freezing p,int
depressant (FPD) fluids were introduced to prevent or retard the formation of
frost during Ol/ernight storage, to assist in melting and rerroval of frost, snow,
or other ice formations such as would develop as a result of freezing rain or
drizzle or for assisting in the removal of ice or frost formations accumulated
during a previous flight.
b. Varioos methods of ai;;plying FPO fluids were utilized, such as rropping
the fluid on the surface requiring treatment from a bucket, use of hand p.unps
Par 3 5
12/ 17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 3
attadled to a supply tank and spreading the solution with a m:::,p, brush or other
suitable devices to, in time, melt the ice to the extent that it could be
removed by using manual ireans.
c. These manual irethods of deicing provided a capability, in clear
weather, to clean an aircraft adequately to allCM a safe takeoff and flight. In
inclement, cold weather conditions, hc,wever, the only alternative was to place
the aircraft in a protected area such as a hangar to perform the cleaning
process by whatever ireans were available. In freezing precipitation conditions,
takeoff had to be initiated alm::>st inmediately follCMing reroval from the
protected area. Ccmoon practice developed was to clean the aircraft in the
hangar and provide a protective coating of FPD fluid (anti-icing) to protect the
aircraft fran ice or snow accumulation prior to takeoff.
d. Many of these techniques remain in use today, depending upon the local
facilities and services that exist. However, rost m:xlern airports have traffic
conditions and limitations of hangar space that, for the m::>st part, preclude
indoor ground deicing. These airports usually have ooe or m:::,re fixed base
operators who have the equip:nent, capability, and experience to clean the
aircraft and provide brief protection to allCM safe takeoff to be performed.
Many airlines have prepositioned ground deicing equip:nent for ranp deicing at
major airports where icing conditions are prevalent in the United States,
Canada, and European countries. Several manufacturers of various types of
aircraft ground deicing equip:nent exist today to ireet the ground support
equip:nent demands of the aviation CX)ftll\Unity. These ground support equip:nents
vary in types fran simple trailers hauling a 55 gallon drum of FPD fluid with a
wobble pump and m:::,p to exotic equip:nent capable of heating and dispensing large
quantities of water and deicing fluid and capable of elevating deicing personnel
to heights necessary to have access to any area of the largest of today's
ai~craft. This technology exists and it is believed that any demand for
aircraft ground deicing can be readily met by the ground support equipnent
industry.
e. Although m::>dern and sophisticated ground support equip:nent exists, cost
considerations sometimes dictate combination of ice reJOC>Val nethods. For
example, heavy accumulations of snow may be m::>re cost effectively reroved using
brocms, brushes, ropes, fire hoses, and other techniques follc:Med -.t?Y final
cleaning with aqueous solutions of FPO fluid. h:Jain, conm:>n sense, experience,
and planning prevail to make the aircraft ground deicing process a cost
effective and safe operation. With the rising cost of petroleum products, the
primary base of m::>st conm:>nly used aircraft deicing fluids, the expense of FPD
fluid deicing has becane a very significant parameter in the final decision
process. An answer to this problem has been developed in recent years
employing use of very hot water. Saoo manufacturers of such equip:nent have
conducted extensive testing and evaluation to develop and perfect the
procedures, precautions, and reccmnended aqueous FPO fluid mixtures necessary
for cost effective, but safe, deicing. However, an understanding of the
equip:nent, the dlaracteristics, and limitations regarding use of FPD fluids is
essential to assure safe winter operations.
6 Par 4
12/17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 3
5. CHARJIC'l'ERISTICS OF FREEZING OOINl' DEPRESSANI' (FPO) AIRCRAET GROUND DEICING
FWICS.
a. Deicing fluid rranufactured in accordance with MIL-A-8243C is by
specification 3 parts ethylene glycol and 1 part propylene glycol mixed with
small quantities of water, corrosion inhibitors and wetting agents to allow
SIIDOth, even coverage of a surface. MIL-A-8243C fluid is specified in two
types. Type I, used by the U.S. Air Force contains the ingredients described
above while Type 11, used by the U.S. Navy contains a small amount of additive
to inhibit a chemical reaction between ethylene glycol and silver oxide. This
additive is used to preclude a EX)SSible fire hazard relating to electrical
relays and switches that incorporate silver oxide electrical contacts.
b. All known conmercially available FRO fluids for aircraft deicing use
are of the ethylene glycol or propylene glycol family. The exact formulae of
various manufacturers' fluids are proprietary. It is very important to
understand that some corrmercially available FPO fluids contain either ethylene
glycol or derivatives of ethylene glycol such as diethylene glycol with small
quantities of crlditives and water; that various FPO manufacturers, upon request,
will premix aqueous solutions of FPO for specific custaner reasons; and that
before using a solution of FPO it is irrperative that the ingredients be checked
by close examination of the stock number and by a quality control examination to
ascertain that the fluid supply conforms to the need. FPO fluid manufacturers
can supply methodology and suggest equipnent needed for quality control
examinations.
c. FPO fluids in use today have characteristics that are best defined by a
phase diagram or freeze chart as illustrated in figure 3-1. It is enphasized
that this diagram is rot representative of any conmercially available FPO
fluids. FPO fluid rranufacturers can furnish fhase diagrams for their product.
This diagram illustrates the variation of the freezing ?)int of various mixtures
with water. FPO fluids are very soluble in water. The addition of glycol to
water will lower the freezing ?)int of the water mixture. The freeze ?)int of
glycol or a glycol/water mixture is rot a sharp ?)int as is the case with water
alone. The freeze ?)int of glycol or a glycol water mixture can be said to
occur when crystals begin to form. As the tenperature is lowered, glycol or
water begins to crystallize and the mixture will assume a slushy consistency.
As CXX)ling proceeds the mixture will thicken and may oo longer flow and
eventually if CXX)led to very low tenperatures can solidify to a hard granular
solid.
d. It can be seen from figure 3-1 that minimum freeze :[X)int (onset of
crystallization) occurs when the mixture consists of approximately 60 percent
glycol and 40 percent water. This is comoonly referred to as the eutectic
point. It can also be seen that beyond the eutectic :[X>int the freezing
temperature of ethylene glycol is higher. This means that p.ire ethylene glycol
will freeze (onset of crystallization) at warmer temperatures than aqueous
solutions of ethylene glycol. Propylene glycol does rot exhibit this
characteristic as shown in figure 3-1. For this reason, all currently available
carurercial and military deicing fluids contain small quantities of water.
Military deicing fluids contain propylene glycol. This facilitates outside
storage at cold temperatures. Generally, sufficient water is added to allow the
7
Par 5
AC 20-117 12/ 17/82
Appendix 3
PHASE DIAGRAM Of AQUEOtlS GLYCOL SOLUTIONS
40------------------------­
0
CAUTION: THIS DIAGRAM IS NOT
REPRESENTATIVE OF ANY
COMMERCIALLY AVAILABLE
20 AIRCRAFT GROUND DEICING
OR ANTI-ICING FLUIDS
-10
10
0
-20
Ir -10 fs'
w' DIETHYLENE GLYCOL'-.,... LL.I
a:. a:.
:, :,
I < ­ -20 ~
a:. -30 a:.
w w
0.. PROPYLENE GLYCOL 0..
~ ~ w
~ -30 I­
-40
-40
-50
-50
EUTECTIC
-60
POINT
-70
-60
-eo--------------------------------------­
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
100% WATER 100% FPO
FPO MIXTURE WITH WATER,% BY WEIGHT (r-URE UNDILUTED)
FIGURE l-1
8 Par 5
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
freeze p:,int to be rot greater than -25°F. However, it is very inportant for
the user of the fluid to know the specific dlaracteristics of the fluid being
used.
6. CAPABILITIES AND LIMITM'IOOS OF FREEZD',K; l?OIN.l' DEPRESSANT (FPO) AIRCRAFT
GRXJND DEICD',K; FWIOO.
a. General. The basic P'}ilosqily of using FPO fluids for aircraft deicing
is to decrease the freezing p:>int of water either in the liquid or crystal (ice)
phase. FPO fluids are very soluble in water. However, the rate at which ice
will absorb FPO or nelt is very slow. If frost, ice, or snow is cdhering to a
wing surface, that ice formation may be nelted by repeated application of proper
quantities of FPO fluid. This process can be significantly accelerated by
thermal energy of heated fluids. As the ice nelts, the FPO mixes with the water
thereby diluting the FPO. As dilution occurs, the resulting mixture may begin
to run off. If all the ice is rot nelted, additional application of FPO becanes
necessary until the fluid reaches the ice/aircraft surface interface. When all
ice has nelted, the liquid residue that remains is a mixture of water and FPD.
The remaining film oould freeze (begin to crystallize) with ooly a slight
temperature decrease. Slight tenperature decreases CX>Uld be induced by many
factors such as oold soaked fuel in wing tanks, reduction of solar radiation by
cloud d:>scuration of the sun, ambient tenperature oooling, wind effects,
temperature depression during developnent of wing lift and other factors. If
the freeze p:>int of the remaining film is found to be insufficient or is
unknown, a fresh ooat of FPD fluid should be cdded before the aircraft is
released for flight. Practice developed and accepted by the air carrier
industry is to assure that the remaining film has a freezing p:>int less than
20°F below ambient tenperature. This entire process can be accatplished by any
means available: i.e., ix>uring, mcg:>ing, brushing, or spraying. Freeze ix>int of
the remaining FPO film can be neasured at specific locations oo a surface using
refractive index techniques.
b. Nonprecipitation Coooitions.
(1) The al:x>ve description is intended to describe the capabilities and
limitations of FPO for deicing (getting the aircraft clean), in a very general
way. As nentioned earlier there are many other nethods of rerooving ice, frost,
or snow deix>sits. Large quantities of FPO would be necessary to try to nelt
ice, frost, and snow and the use of this nethod alone may rot be oost effective
or tinely. 'lllis is especially true with regard to snow dep'.)Sits. The deicing
process can IX>SSibly be aecatplished rrore oost effectively by canbining manual
methods to first reroove soft snow and then using the FPO fluid to remove any
residual ice. In sane instances, where the snow is rot adhering to surfaces,
all snow may be removed by sweeping, brushing, or blowing with oool air (either
shop air or other pressurized air sources). Hot air should rot be used to
attempt to remove dry snow. In clear (nonprecipitation) weather, once proper
inspection has been perfcmed, ro further action may be necessary.
(2) Where nndern grouoo support equipnent (GSE) is available, conman
practice is to use water heated to approximately 180°F and glyool heated to
approximately 150°F. Sane GSE manufacturers recoomend that hot water alone be
used to nelt and remove snow, frost, or ice formations. This is ix>ssible
Par 5 9
--------------------~
------
AC 20-117 12/17/82
Appendix 3
because of the heat applied, as well as the mechanical force of the stream
tending to rrelt, loosen, and flush ice formations from the aircraft.
~
(3) Sane manufacturers reccmnend that p.1re hot water can be used to
deice the aircraft at ambient temperatures above +26°F. Below that temperature
or if ice formations occur, sufficient FPO mixed with the water is reccmnended
to prevent freezing during the deicing process. In the latter case, as
discussed before, the freeze point of the remaining film may be unkrx,wn. Once
the aircraft is clean (deiced) a final coat of FPO should be added to prevent
freezing due to temperature depression by any of the factors mentioned earlier.
If hot water alone is used for deicing, all surfaces should be coated with a
solution of FPO to assure that the freezing point of remaining filnv3 will be oo
greater than 20°F below ambient or surface temperature whichever is lower.
(4) Other techniques include frequent use of FPO fluids during storage
under conditions of precipitation or frost to reduce the workload and time
required to prepare an aircraft for flight. Experience has shown that if ice
formations are not allowed to adhere to an aircraft surface they a'te easier to
reroove. If ice formations can be prevented from forming, only final inspections
need to be performed under sare conditions. Under other oonditions, however,
further treatment may be required to assure that the residual film has a
freezing point sufficiently low to prevent ice crystals from forming during taxi
and takeoff.
c. Conditions of Freezing Precipitation.
(1) General.
(i) The foregoing paragra?'ls deal primarily with the capabilities
and limitations of FPO fluids in clear (nonprecipitation) weather oonditions.
This paragra?'l addresses the capabilities and limitations of FPO fluids under
weather conditions where ice, frost, or snow may form. FPO fluids have the
capability of preventing the formation of frost, ice, or snow for a finite
perioo of time. The time of protection depends upon many factors and is
therefore unpredictable. The primary factors that influence this time of
protection are ambient temperature, surface temperature, FPO fluid film
thickness, FPO mixture strength, and the rate of addition of roisture. These
factors are influenced by many other variables such as solar radiation, relative
htnnidity, surface contour, surface inclination angle, surface roughness, wind
effects, fluid application procedures, residual roisture on the surface prior to
deicing, etc. But to bring the i;:bysical process into perspective ooe nust
visualize a simple case where ooly a few of these variables are examined.
(ii) As discussed earlier, once the deicing process is carpleted,
a thin film of deicing fluid remains oo the surface and this film contains a
mixture of FPO and water. The ratio of water to FPO is unknown and therefore
the freezing point is unknown. Assume that a very rich mixture of fluid is
uniformly added to the surface in a manner that rost roisture is flushed 8Jllay
while realizing that sane water will always remain in the solution. Also assume
that the fluid film that remains is 80% ethylene glyool. Under these
assumptions, the question then becanes "How much water nust be added to this
remaining film to cause the freeze point of the fluid to reach that of ambient
temperature?" To answer this question, test results have shown that when
10 Par 6
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
ambient and surface temperature is 20°F the fluid film thickness ma surface
sloped at an angle of 15° is at b?st (the nost) 0.10 nm deep. Fran the freeze
chart (figure 3-1) it can b? seen that at 20°F a mixture of 16 percent ethylene
glycol and 84 percent water will begin to crystalize.
(2) Snow Conditions.
(i) Precipitation rates in snow conditions have b?en found to
contain water in arrounts up to 0.7 in/hr. A general rule of thumb, comronly
used by meteorologists, is that the depth of snow is aoout 10 times the depth of
melted snow. This rule of thumb, although useful for some p,irposes, could be
misleading, since snow densities vary widely. Very dry snow can have a density
of 30:1 (30 inches of snow contains 1 inch of water) and very wet snow can have
a density of 5:1. In snow conditions, the primary influence ui;x:>n FPO life is
the rate of addition of water and subsequent dilution of the FPO fluid. If snow
is falling at a rate of 1/2 inch per hour and if the water content of this snow
is 0.1, then the rate of addition of water to the FPD will be 0.05 in/hr.
(ii) If we assume that as the falling snow contacts the surface
film it nelts and the resulting water mixes thoroughly with the fluid contained
in the film, the strength (glycol to water ratio) of 16 percent will b? reached
in a specific time. This time can be calculated using rationale and equations
given in appendix 2.
(iii) From this assessment we can see that at a snowfall rate of
1/2 inch per hour mto a wing having been coated with a very rich mixture, 100
percent ethylene glycol, at an ambient terrperature of 20°F, crystallization may
begin in approximately 25 minutes. Figure 3-2 presents the estimated life of
deicing fluids as a function of ambient temperature for several snowfall rates.
Extreme caution is emphasized that these estimates should not be used to attempt
to estimate the time available fran deicing or anti-icing to takeoff, as noted
clearly on the chart. The reason for this caution is that these estimated times
are influenced by many variables, and figure 3-2 takes into account cnly a few.
These variables are emphasized and their effects discussed in paragraph 7 of
this appendix.
Par 6 11
AC 20-117 CHG .1 4/15/83
Appendix 3
40,----------------------------.-­
CAUTION: THIS REPRESENTS ONE EXAMPLE
OF THE USE OF AN FPO FLUID.
DO NOT USE THIS CHART FOR
ESTIMATING TIME AVAILABLE
_ 30
z FROM DEICING TO TAKEOFF.
­
:i
z
0
ASSUMPTIONS:
~
=
dt 0.05 mm
:J
=
-' 20 M 60% ETHYLENE GLYCOL
1
~ =
Rw 0.1 R
6
>
a:
(.)
~
w
SNOW FALL RATE
~
j:: 10
rnf"t'
. /ht lf>lf> ~
'/4 ,n
1 mm/hf)
2 1
t==-------..!'~/2;.i:n:/h:r:l':],· in/hf l"'l f>· 4 mm/hf\
o----_...._________'-_____._____
...1...___
~
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
TEMPERATURE °F
FIGURE 3-2
(iv) It is emphasized that the al:x>ve rationalization regarding the
finite life of FPD fluids is simplified for understanding p..1qx>ses. Other
physical processes occur within an FPD fluid film in the dynamic condition .of
precipitation or addition of moisture by any means. It is imperative that .this
process be understcx:x:i by all associated with winter c:perations of aircraft.
(v) To assist the understanding of this process, figure 3-3
depicts a surface containing a film of FJ?D fluid.
12 Par 6
AC 20-117
12/ 17/82 Appendix 3
---- H20 FROM SNOWFLAKE #2
---- ICE CRYSTAL
H 0 FROM MELTED SNOWFLAKE #1
2
--- FPD FLUID
---AIRCRAFT SURFACE
FIGURE 3-3
(vi) As snow contacts the upper surface of this film it ITElts and
the water, begins to mix with the FPO fluid. It is known that glycols are very
soluble in water but it is also known that to assure a horoogeneous fluid, the
mixture must be agitated or stirred. So when a snowflake or other ice crystal,
supercooled rain drop, or water in any form contacts the fluid film surface, a
finite time is required for the water to mix with the fluid. During this time,
the water remains sanewhat in 1:X,1re form or a weak c:queous solution of FPD. If
during this process, before the water from a snowflake mixes with the fluid,
another snowflake inpacts the surface, as depicted in figure 3-3, a p:>rtion of
the snowflake may rot ITElt inmediately but will remain in ice-crystal form.
This process has been observed during simulated snow testing. As snow continues
to impact the surface, ice crystals can be seen to form oo localized areas of
the surface of the FPO fluid. Whether or rot these ice crystals will bond to
the aircraft surface depends upon many factors, such as: fluid film thickness,
FPO fluid strength, surface temperature, ambient tenperature and temperature of
snow, rain, or ice crystals inpacting the surface. Another factor is the latent
heat of fusion~ however, this effect is slight in oonparison to heat transfer to
ambient air or to ma.ssive aircraft structures. As a snowflake inpacts the FPO
surface and ITElts, heat is transferred from the fluid to the ice crystal. This
reduces the surface temperature and, as precipitation oontinues, the rate at
which snow will melt is reduced.
(vii) If the FPO film is sufficiently thick, these surface ice
crystals may initially be localized on or near the surface or be floating on the
surface. But as the process oontinues, water being added will gradually mix
with the FPD fluid and, in time, the fluid in the surface film will reach an
aqueous solution that will freeze (become slush) at the prevailing temperature
Par 6 13
AC 20-117 12/17/82
Appendix 3
and with time bea:::me frozen or adhere to the aircraft surface. As the quantity
of slush increases, the viscosity of the surface film increases, requiring
greater forces to cause the surface slush to be blown off of aircraft surfaces.
Once the crystallization process begins, the chances of proper blow-off during
takeoff roll are minimal. In crl:lition, once the crystallization process begins,
the surface may be expected to be a rough texture which can adversely inpair
aircraft performance and flight dlaracteristics. It is also very inp:>rtant to
uooerstand that many varieties of occur in nature and each will result in
SJ1CM
differing characteristics (surface textures or roughness) during the process of
dilution and crystallization of FPO fluid mixtures.
(3) Frost Coooitions.
(i) Frost is formed fran the sublimation of water vapor cnto a
surface where the temperature is below freezing. A method of retarding the
formation of frost on aircraft surfaces is by applying a film of FPO fluid. As
in previous examples, the maxinun thickness of fluid that can be expected to be
retained is 0.10 nm. A typical heavy frost condition will produce a rate of
accumulation of liquid water (in the form of frost) of 0.0008 in/hr or 0.02
nm/hour. Again, we may, as an exanple, estimate tx:,w long the protective film of
FPO fluid may last and assess the condition of the fluid as a function of time
using rationale and nethods contained in appendix 2. The rationale used for
snow awlies as well for frost since the FPO fluid will absorb the water rather
than allow fonnation of frost, i.e., until the FPO fluid mixture is diluted to
its freeze point. Then frost can begin to accumulate. However, it is
enphasized that, under frost conditions, moisture will be absorbed by FPO fluids
at a faster rate than roisture ~uld be deposited in the form of frost. This is
due to the hygroscopic nature of FPO fluids.
(ii) Assume that the anbient temperature is 20°F and the mixture
that will begin to freeze at that tenperature is 16 percent FPO fluid. In this
case, we have assumed that a SO percent solution of ethylene glycol and water
was applied to a clean dry surface prior to the beginning of the dew or frost
process. This example would be representative of a heavy frost condition, but
it is emphasized that film thickness also is an extreme case. The estimated
time of effectiveness for this exarrple is 10.4 hrs. It is ertp1asized that
hygroscopic effects and other variables can significantly reduce this time.
(iii) Figure 3-4 provides the estimated life of FPO fluids for
various frost conditions. Extreme caution is emphasized that these estimates
should not be used to attempt to estimate time available fran deicing or
anti-icing to takeoff, as noted clearly on the chart. Many other factors nust
be considered, such as type of FPO fluid, surfaces to which the fluid is
applied, surface temperature, and other variables mentioned earlier. In
addition, it is in:p:>rtant to realize that when the FPO fluid has been diluted to
the freeze point, crystallization has begun. kl.y slight reduction in surface
temperature could result in further crystallization and dangerous surface
roughness. After the frost protection process has been utilized, the aircraft
surfaces affected should be thoroughly cleaned and inspected to assure that
residual diluted fluids will rot freeze during takeoff and climb:::>ut. This also
applies to conditions where ambient temperature has increased since the
application of the initial or repeated anti-frost solutions, because surface
14
Par 6
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
temperature depression oo the upper surface of a wing producing lift can be
significant. Temperature depression is a function of wing design, airspeed, and
the aroount of lift being produced. The aircraft manufacturer can provide
specific values of tenperature depression for their aircraft. care should be
taken to assure that the residual surface film of FPO has a freeze p:>int m
greater than 20°F below ambient tenperature whichever is lO'ft'er.
CAUTION: THIS REPRESENTS ONE EXAMPLE
OF THE USE OF AN FPO FLUID.
DO NOT USE THIS CHART FOR
ESTIMATING TIME AVAILABLE
FROM DEICING OR ANTI-ICING
1s
TO TAKEOFF.
0
a:
::::,
-0
:c
z
0
~
_, 10
~
U)
> FROST
a:
(.)
f:
w
~
;:: 5
0.02 mm/hr
o.03
mm/hr =
6 0.05 mm
1
=
M 60% ETHYLENE GLYCOL
1
o~--~:------:"::----...J....---...L----.L.-_
_J
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
TEMPERATURE °F
FIGURE 3-4
(4) Freezing Rain arx1 Drizzle Coooitions.
(i) Precipitation rates in freezing rain and drizzle oonditions
have been found to vary frooi about 0.3 to 5.0 nm per hour or about 0.01 to 0.20
in/hr. These oonditions can occur at ambient tenperatures between 32°F and
Par 6 15
12/17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 3
approximately 12°F. Freezing rain and drizzle water droplets are in the
supercooled liquid state and freeze upon .inpact with other d::>jects. Because of
the large size of freezing rain droplets (400 to 1300 microns) the ice produced
is usually glaze ice. When an aircraft surface is coated with a film of FPD
fluid, freezing rain and drizzle droplets inpacting the fluid film will mix
readily with FPD fluid, causing rapid dilution and urrler certain conditions can
wash EMay the FPD fluid. The effectiveness of FPO fluids to provide protection
in freezing rain conditions can be estimated using the techniques contained in
appendix 2. Under the nost severe freezing ra;n conditions (5.0 nm/hour or
aoout 0.2 in/hour) crystallization \tlOuld be expected to begin in less than 11
minutes at 25°F if p.ire ethylene glycol were used and if FPD fluid film
thickness is assi..nned to be 0.1 nm. Airline q;,erational experience indicates
that FPD fluids are short-lived in nost freezing rain conditions. In many
instances, one side of the aircraft already deiced will begin to refreeze while
the other side is being deiced. Figure 3-5 provides estimated FPD fluid life as
a function of ambient temperature for several freezing rain precipitation rates.
Extreme caution is emphasized that this chart should not be used to attempt to
estimate time available fran deicing to takeoff.
20-----------------------,,-----...--..--,
CAUTION:
THIS REPRESENTS ONE
EXAMPLE OF THE USE OF
AN FPO FLUID. DO NOT
FREEZING RAIN RATE
USE THIS CHART FOR
z 15 ESTIMATING TIME
:e AVAILABLE FROM
DEICING TO
z
TAKEOFF.
0
~
::::;
....I
~ 10
Cl)
>­
a:
u
~
w
:e
~
f('\/\'\f'
l21£,4 fC\ 61 = 0.05 mm
oJO ,o/hf . roro/hr)
=
0.20 in/hr lS,08 M1 60% ETHYLENE
GLYCOL
0 ...__ ____.______.______.__________..____
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
TEMPERATURE °F
FIGURE 3-5
16 Par 6
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
(ii) It is enp1asized that aircraft ice protection systems are
designed basically to rope with the supercooled cloud environment (not freezing
rain). Supercooled cloud water droplets have a Iredian volumetric diameter (MVD)
of 5 to 50 microns. Freezing rain MVD is as great as 1300 microns. Large
droplets of freezing rain impact nuch larger areas of aircraft corcponents and
will, in time, exceed the capability of m::>st ice protection equipnent. Flight
in freezing rain should be avoided where practical.
7. VARIABLFS INFLUENCING THE EFFECTIVENF.SS OF AIRCRAFT GRXJND DEICING FWIOO.
Many variables can influence the effectiveness of FPO fluids for deicing and the
life of these fluids, especially under oonditions where m::>isture is being cdled
to the fluid. This section is intended to provide a basic understanding of
these variables and their influences. Each of these variables is discussed in
the following subparagrai;tls.
a. Chemical Carp:;,sition of FPO Fluids. FPO fluids intended for use in
deicing or anti-icing aircraft are manufactured and distributed by a wide
variety of CXl'lpanies either to manufacturer or custcmer specifications. Each
may oontain a cxxnbination of dlemicals that have various freeze dlaracteristics.
Although each FPO fluid is manufactured within tolerances oontained in the
specification, batches may differ and may have significant variations in
characteristics.
b. Freezing Characteristics of FPO Fluids. These dlaracteristics were
discussed in detail in a previous pa.ragrai;tl of this appendix. It is enphasized
here that before a fluid is used oo an aircraft, the freeze dlaracteristics
should be known by the user. A nethod of determining this is by thorough
urrlerstanding of fluid procurement specifications and tolerances and quality
control inspections or sarrpling by either the manufacturer or the user. In
addition, FPO fluids are either premixed (diluted with water) by the
manufacturer or mixed by the user fran bulk supplies. To assure known freezing
characteristics, samples of the final mixture should be analyzed.
c. FPO Fluid.Strength When Applied.
(i) Fluid strength or the ratio of FPO ingredients, such as ethylene
glycol to water, may be known if proper precautions are taken prior to
application such as those outlined above. It is important, however, to realize
that fluid strength is a very significant factor in deicing properties as well
as the time that the FPO fluid may remain effective (anti-icing).
(ii) Figure 3-6 presents estimates of ethylene glycol life as a
fW1ction of ambient temperature for several cx:mnonly used fluid strengths. It
can be seen that as fluid strength is increased, the time of effectiveness
increases dramatically. This figure is presented for reference purposes only to
illustrate the variation of fPD fluid life and should not be used for flight
planning purposes. It is also enphasized that µJre (100 percent) ethylene
glycol fluids should rot be used in ronprecipitation conditions, since the
freeze point is nuch higher than fluids diluted with Wqter, as illustrated in
figure 3-1. camon practice of the aviation cannunity is never to exceed the
eutectic point when using ethylene glycol base fluids.
Par 6 17
AC 20-117
12/17/82
Appendix 3
so----­
CAUTION: THIS REPRESENTS ONE EXAMPLE
OF THE USE OF AN FPO FLUID.
40 DO NOT USE THIS CHART FOR
ESTIMATING TIME AVAILABLE
FROM DEICING TO TAKEOFF.
z
~
~ 30
j::
~ ASSUMPTIONS:
::i = 3
....I Of 0.05 mm (1.97 X 10- in)
~ =
Rs 1/2 in/hr
en
>­ Rw = 0.1 R
a: 5
u 20
0
1­
w
:E
j::
10
0
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
TEMPERATURE °F
FIGURE 3-6
d. Residual Moisture on the Surface. If a known (quantified strength) FPD
fluid is added to a clean dry surface, the residual strength can generally be
relied upon to remain at that strength if precipitation is oot in process.
HCMever, if residual m:>isture (fran any source1 e.g., dew, melted ice,
precipitation, etc.) is present on the surface, that rroisture can be expected to
18 Par 7
12/17/82 AC 20-117
Appendix 3
further dilute the FPO fluid being used. This will change the freeze
characteristics and influence effectiveness time of the final film of FPO
fluid.
e. Fluid Film Thickness. After FPO fluid has been med to an aircraft
surface, a thin film of FPO fluid will remain on the surface. This fluid film
thickness has been found to vary from O. 002 mn to about O. 100 mn and is
influenced by many parameters, but primarily surface and fluid temperature,
fluid viscosity, surface contour, surface inclination angle, and surface
tension. Film thickness (on a finite area of the surface) influences the
effectiveness of the fluid. '!be effectiveness of the FPO fluid will be
different on various parts of the aircraft. Figure 3-7 presents an enpirically
derived relationship for estimating fluid film thickness as a function of
several of these variables. It is enphasized that FPO fluid film thickness can
vary significantly in the vicinity of surface discontinuities such as seams,
cowling, inspection plates, rivets and screws, etc.
..---------------------::a-­
0.060
0.050
e
!
0.040
Cl)
ffi
z
~u
0.030
df = 0.0267 = 0.0088V;
e
/A
sin 9
~
~
WHERE:
iI 0.020
=
II ­ IA FLUID VISCOSITY (lb/ft-hr)
e = FLUID DENSITY (lb/tt3)
"O
8 = INCLINATION ANGLE (degrees)
0.010
0.000 _________________________,
0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0
V;~ne
FIGURE 3-7
f. FPO Fluid ~lication Techniques. Generally, FPO fluids, given time,
will seek an equilibrium film thickness regardless of the nethod of application
if the fluid is awlied in a uniform manner using sufficient quantities of
fluid. All FPO fluids in ccmoon use contain wetting agents to aid in this
process. If sufficient fluid is mt added to the surface, desired film
thickness may mt be achieved. If the FPD fluid is mt uniformly applied,
localized areas may be left with less than desired film thickness. In
conditions of precipitation, if the rate of FPD awlication is slow, areas
Par 7 19
AC 20-117 12/17/82
Appendix 3
treated first with FPO fluid can have totally different dlaracteristics than
areas treated last. In cases where oot water alone is being used for deicing,
areas previously oversprayed with FPO fluids can be diluted by water splashed or
flowing fran other areas being deiced. All of these factors are variables that
can influence the effectiveness.
g. Ambient T~rature. A specific mixture of FPO fluid will freeze
(begin to crystallize) at a specific ambient temperature. For that specific
mixture, the freeze p::>int is accurate and repeatable. sane cockpit installed
outside air temperature gages are known to have inaccuracies as great as
.:ts 0c. In addition,' the ambient temperature at the ranp, gate, tiedown area,
taxiway or runway, may vary significantly from the tenperature in the airp:,rt
tower or fran the therrocmeter on the line shack wall. Jnbient tenperature may
be steady, rising, or falling. Each of these variables, usually unkrx,wn to the
pilot, can either independently or in combination influence the time of
effectiveness of FPO fluids.
h. Aircraft Surface Temperature.
(1) Aircraft surface (skin) temperature also influences FPO fluid
effectiveness time. Surface temperatures can be drastically different from
ambient temperatures for many reasons: solar radiation (cloudy day, surmy day,
parked in the shade, etc.); temperatures of fuel in fuel cells; the type and
location of fuel cells; fuel oold soaked during previous high altitude flight;
quantity of fuel in fuel cells; the source of fuel (above or below ground
storage); time since refueling; engine q;>eration; APU operation; q;>eration of
subsystems or components that generate heat; thickness of the skin, type of
skins, and skin materials. These are only a few of the many variables that can
influence aircraft surface temperature.
(2) Camon practice accepted in the aviation o::mnunity is that if it
can be determined that a small quantity of dry snow is oot adhering to aircraft
surfaces, it will blow off during the takeoff roll and thereby oot affect
aircraft flight characteristics. This practice is well proven if one can
ascertain that the snow is oot adhering to critical surfaces. Dry snow at oold
ambient temperatures will oot adhere to dry aircraft surfaces if surface
temperatures are also very oold and will remain oold during start, tax!, and
takeoff. However, operation of engines, or other equipnent, refueling, solar
radiation and many other factors may warm surface tenperatures, causing melting
or partial melting of snow and p::>ssibly cause freezing prior to takeoff or
during the takeoff roll. Sinply checking the consistency of snow during
pre-flight inspection is not considered adequate. Pretakeoff inspections should
also be performed. In addition, during preflight inspection and pretakeoff
inspection, caution should be exercised when making this judgment to oot rely
up:,n sp:,t checking, especially on areas of oollow structures, such as ailerons,
sp:,ilers, etc., since these devices are oot oormally exp:,sed to certain heat
sources. Under certain oonditions dry snow oould adequately blow off of a dry
cold Sp::>iler but oot from large fuel tankage areas.
i. Solar Radiation. Solar radiation can significantly influence aircraft
surface and FPO fluid temperatures. In oonditions of heavy precipitation, solar
radiation is usually slight. Generally, solar radiation will warm aircraft
surfaces, but, in shadow areas, surface and FPO fluid temperatures will be
colder.
20 Par 7
12/17/82
AC 20-117
Appendix 3
j. Wind. .Ambient wind blowing CNer an aircaft surface tends to renove
heat fran the surface at a nore rapid rate than under calm conditions.
Evaporation of liquids can cause surface tenperatures to actually be lower than
ambient. The rate of reduction of surface tenperatures and the tenperature
depression is a function of many variables that make it inpractical to estimate,
but this factor can influence FPO fluid effectiveness.
k. FPO Fluid Teprature. Elevated FPO fluid tenperatures (hot fluid) are
camonly used during the aircraft ground deicing process to assist in rrelting
and reducing bond strength of ice formations. Fluid viscosity, however, is
reduced with increases of fluid temperature. This can reduce the residual
surface film thickness that is an essential parameter in FPO fluid
effectiveness. Al.so, if hot fluids are applied during precipitation conditions
(snow or other ice crystal), during the time that elevated fluid tercperatures
remain, the heat provides a source of latent heat of fusion to rrelt impacting
snow/ice crystals and to mix with and dilute the mixture. This process is
favorable in that formation of water crystals in the upper surfaces of the fluid
film will be delayed. However, in the presence of wind and other factors, the
additional time, if any, cannot be estimated. If hot FPO fluids are oot
utilized, ice crystals {precipitation) impacting the fluid will rrelt and mix at
a slower rate and the latent heat of fusion demand will depress the surface film
temperature. Use of hot or cold FPO fluids is considered acceptable comnon
practice, however, unheated fluids will leave greater aroounts of residual film
prolonging effectiveness while heated fluids are nore effective in the deicing
process.
1. Precipitation Rate and Type. Subfreezing precipitation occurs in many
forms: supercooled rain (freezing rain or drizzle), snow, sleet, and
canbinations thereof. Each of these conditions can produce an infinite variety
of conditions and resulting characteristics on the surface of an aircraft. Snow
has been categorized into 22 varieties, each having different crystalline
structure and each containing various amounts of frozen water (density). Each
type of precipitation contains droplets or ice crystals having various
temperatures which may be equal to or below ambient temperature. These CX>Jllbined
effects introduce another set of variables that cannot be quantitatively
assessed to determine their influence upon effectiveness of FPO fluids.
However, under these conditions surface roughness can vary significantly and in
conjunction with other variables, time-to-initiation of freezing {surface
roughness) can vary.
m. Operation on Snow, Slush, or Wet Surfaces. Such operations can cause
ice, snow or slush to be splashed or blown onto various aircraft surfaces. Jet
engine exhaust {i n forward or reverse thrust), jet engine inlet vortices, prop
or rotor wash, and taxi and takeoff operations can, through recirculation,
blowing, or splashing, cause snow, ice particles or water to impact various
aircraft surfaces and freeze or ~here to these surfaces or further dilute FPO
deicing fluids. These occurrences are scmewhat predictable and should be
expected during ground operations. The effect of these occurrences is
unpredictable. If ice formations are anticipated, the clean aircraft concept
must be implemented. These occurrences can also have an influence upon FPO
fluid effectiveness.
Par 7 21
*
U, S, Government Printins Office : l 988 -516-018/80302
