Airbus technical magazine
March 2018
#61
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Already have the FAST app?
Now get the latest news for customers
via Newsfeed by Airbus.
FAST
Airbus Airbus
by by
FAST and Newsfeed by Airbus apps
are downloadable to your preferred device
Already have the FAST app?
Now get the latest news for customers
via Newsfeed by Airbus.
FAST
Airbus Airbus by by
FAST and Newsfeed by Airbus apps
are downloadable to your preferred device 16#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#61
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Alizée GENILLOUD
Chief Editor: Deborah BUCKLER
Design: PONT BLEU Engine Bleed Air System 04
Cover image: Sylvain RAMADIER Increasing reliability
Printer: Amadio with preventive maintenance
Authorisation for reprinting
FAST magazine articles A350 XWB composite 10
should be requested by email:
bonded repair
fast.magazine@airbus.com
New technology for new aircraft
FAST magazine is available on internet
www.aircraft.airbus.com/
support-services/publications/ Technical data 18
for maintenance
and on tablets or smartphones
Taking efficiency to new dimensions
ISSN 1293-5476
A350 XWB vertical 26
© AIRBUS 2018 All rights reserved. Proprietary document
stabiliser continuous joint
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted Precision technology
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified for attachment fittings
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
Supporting ageing fleets 32
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements Scheduling the unscheduled
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for FAST from the past 38
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of Around the clock, 39
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks. around the world
Photo copyright Airbus Field representatives
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Corporate Heritage,
Master Films, Hervé Gousset, Philippe Masclet, Pascal Pigeyre, Jean-Baptiste Accariez
16#TSAF
40
Engine Bleed
Air System
Increasing reliability with preventive maintenance
Article by
Benjamin CALVET
Air and Inerting System Engineer
AIRBUS
benjamin.calvet@airbus.com
By carrying out preventive maintenance on the Engine
Bleed Air System, operators can significantly reduce both
Operational Interruptions (OI) and costs, as proven over
the last five years.
This sub-system draws hot air from the engines, which
is then distributed for essential functions such as cabin
pressurisation and air intake de-icing.
16#TSAF
50
Engine Bleed Air System
An overview The Engine Bleed Air System is a sub-system of the Bleed Air System that is
installed directly within the aircraft engine. It allows air to be bled from several
of the Engine engine ports in order to ensure sufficient pressurised air is provided to consumers*
which include:
Bleed Air • Engine starting • Fuel Tank Inerting System (FTIS)
(including cross starting)
• Cabin air generation and cooling systems
System
• Wing anti-ice system (ATA21)
• Cabin pressurisation • Pressurisation of hydraulic tank, as well as
waste and water storage tanks
Engine Bleed Engine Bleed
Air System 1 Air System 2
Wing Ice Water tank Hydraulics tank Wing Ice
Protection System pressurisation pressurisation Protection System
(ATA 30) (ATA 38) (ATA 38) (ATA 30)
Starter Starter
(ATA 80) (ATA 80)
Conditioned Service Conditioned Service
Air System Auxiliary High Air System
(ATA 21) Power Pressure (ATA 21)
Unit Ground
(ATA 49) Carts
Fuel Tank Inerting System Pack 1 Pack 2 Fuel Tank Inerting System
(ATA 47) (ATA 21) (ATA 21) (ATA 47)
This sub-system provides consumers* with high temperature air (200°C) Engine Bleed Air Systems have
at high pressure (44 PSI) and has 3 main functions: evolved with each Airbus aircraft
programme. Earlier generation
Aircraft systems families such as the A320ceo
1 Temperature Aircraft Bleed and the A330ceo are fitted with
control systems M co o m ni p to u r t i e n r g full pneumatic Engine Bleed Air
Systems whereas more recent
2 Pressure
overboard
regulation Engine bleed po V s a i l t v i e on Temperature programmes are fitted with
push button electro-pneumatic systems.
3 Pressure switch Precooler
control exchanger
Over-
Airbus Full Electro-
pressure ThC ThS
To starter valve valve Fan air aircraft pneumatic pneumatic
(Rolls Royce) valve programme EBAS EBAS
Sense line 4
A320ceo X
Sense line 1 Pr
A330ceo X
Sense line 3
Pressure Pt
regulating Sense line 2 A340 basic X
valve
HP bleed valve A340-500/600 X
To starter valve
(Pratt & Whitney, A380 X
General Electric) ThC=Temperature Control Thermostat
A350 X
IP ThS=Solenoid Thermostat
Fan check
valve A320neo X
A330neo X
High
Pressure
Intermediate
(HP)
Pressure * A function which ‘consumes’ bleed air.
(IP)
16#TSAF
60
Engine Bleed Air System
Defining the need
Engine Bleed Air System failures can lead to unscheduled maintenance with FAIR
associated operational interruptions, as well as to severe events such as in-flight Airbus’ Forum with Airlines for
turn-back or diversion due to loss of cabin pressurisation capability. Interactive Resolution, where airlines
share their experience on dedicated
Initially, design improvements were introduced on the full pneumatic bleed
topics.
systems used on early generation families (A320ceo, A330ceo and A340 basic).
If an airline is affected by a specific
However, given the impact of bleed systems on operational reliability, a solution
issue, it posts a new item for further
was required to counter-balance performance degradation due to bleed
discussion with other airlines.
component ageing.
Airbus regularly screens the item
Preventive maintenance for the full pneumatic Bleed Air System on A320ceo and provides development updates.
aircraft was first discussed several years ago, between airlines and Airbus, with
the creation of a dedicated FAIR (see insert) working group for single aisle
aircraft. This discussion involved airlines who expected to have dedicated
preventive maintenance on the Engine Bleed Air System. The programme was The Engine
required to address all Airbus aircraft fitted with full pneumatic Bleed Air Systems
and to involve only limited investment by airlines.
Bleed Check
helps prevent
Finding the solution : Engine Bleed Check
Based on the above requirements, Airbus and Liebherr (valve supplier for engine unexpected
manufacturers) developed a preventive maintenance programme to detect a drift
in the system’s functions before a fault is triggered. The Engine Bleed Check operational
preventive maintenance programme was created. To validate the efficiency of
this solution, it was tested on both the A320ceo and A330ceo.
incidents
This preventive maintenance was first introduced in 2012 on the A320ceo,
and then on the A330ceo and A340 basic. Airbus and Liebherr worked closely by detecting
together to define relevant tests and criteria at system and equipment level,
based on incident reporting provided to Airbus from customer workshops. initial deviations
The check tests the three main functions of the Engine Bleed Air System:
• Temperature Control and enabling
• Pressure Regulation
scheduled
• Pressure Control
maintenance
The procedures used to perform these tests have been implemented in the
Aircraft Maintenance Manual. Each procedure has been designed to use only
test ports and the deactivation screw of the valves, to test the defined
sub-system functions while avoiding the removal of components.
In addition, dedicated thresholds have been identified to detect drift in each
function and then schedule the corrective action necessary to redress the drifts.
Additionally, these thresholds are also defined so that any equipment that is
removed for testing in shop will be confirmed faulty. The degree of precision
offered by the check avoids needlessly removing and sending equipment for
verification, only for it to be returned as No Fault Found.
However, it is important to highlight that the Engine Bleed Check should not be
considered as part of a troubleshooting solution following a failure. Dedicated
troubleshooting tasks should be applied when a fault is triggered.
16#TSAF
70
Engine Bleed Air System
Airbus Bleed Test Set and associated
kit for Engine Bleed Check
PN 98L36103002000
PN M82000678
SBE2213
What tools are needed to perform
this preventive action? Airbus set Liebherr set
As stipulated by the airlines, their investment to Bleed Test
implement this preventive maintenance had to be set PN 98L36103002000 PN 99127B03
limited. With this in mind, the main tool required
for the check is the Bleed Test Set that is already
used for troubleshooting.
Liebherr
A320 Family: 99127-231
Two troubleshooting Bleed Test Sets are proposed, Bleed Test
A330 Family: 99127-241
one supplied by Airbus and the other supplied by set kit
A340 basics: 99127-251
Liebherr. The tools are the same for the A320ceo,
A330ceo and A340, and AMM procedures have been
designed to be applied using the two proposed Bleed Liebherr
Test Sets. In addition to these, several adaptors are Universal
PN M82000678
also necessary to perform tests. The table to the right Test Port
shows all the tools necessary to implement the Engine
Bleed Check.
Sense line
Both Airbus and Liebherr sets are available through
tester SBE2213
the Airbus Spares portal for customers.
Temperature control Pressure regulation Pressure control
16#TSAF
80
Engine Bleed Air System
How often should tests be performed?
Based on a worldwide fleet study taking into account both fleet experience
(Operational Interruption main drivers) and components experience (MTBUR/ MTBF*),
the typical interval for Engine Bleed Checks should be 18 months for A330ceo Family
aircraft and the A340 basic, and 20 months for A320ceo Family aircraft. However, this
interval can be adapted by each airline depending on their key Engine Bleed Air
System OI drivers.
In addition, procedures have been designed to be as adaptable as possible.
They allow airlines to perform one test of a given function and on one engine, rather
than performing the full set of tests on all engines. This adaptability allows airlines to
implement the Engine Bleed Check depending on their experience.
The time required to perform one task is approximately two man hours.
* MTBUR Mean Time Between Unscheduled Removals
MTBF Mean Time Between Failures
What procedures are available?
All procedures for the A320ceo, A330ceo and the A340 basic are already available
through AMM tasks that are quoted in the below tables:
Temperature AMM task ref. using AMM task ref. using
Control Liebherr Bleed Test set Airbus Bleed Test set
A330 GE 36-11-00-720-809-A 36-11-00-720-809-A01
A330 PW 36-11-00-720-812-A 36-11-00-720-812-A01
A330 RR 36-11-00-720-815-A 36-11-00-720-815-A01
A340 36-11-00-720-821-A 36-11-00-720-821-A01
A320 36-11-00-720-802-A 36-11-00-720-802-A01
Pressure AMM task ref. using AMM task ref. using
regulation Liebherr Bleed Test set Airbus Bleed Test set
A330 GE 36-11-00-720-810-A 36-11-00-720-810-A01
A330 PW 36-11-00-720-813-A 36-11-00-720-813-A01
A330 RR 36-11-00-720-816-A 36-11-00-720-816-A01
A340 36-11-00-720-823-A 36-11-00-720-823-A01
A320 36-11-00-720-804-A 36-11-00-720-804-A01
Pressure AMM task ref. using AMM task ref. using
control Liebherr Bleed Test set Airbus Bleed Test set
A330 GE 36-11-00-720-811-A 36-11-00-720-811-A01
A330 PW 36-11-00-720-814-A 36-11-00-720-814-A01
A330 RR 36-11-00-720-817-A 36-11-00-720-817-A01
A340 36-11-00-720-822-A 36-11-00-720-822-A01
A320 36-11-00-720-806-A 36-11-00-720-806-A01
CONCLUSION
The Engine Bleed Check is a preventive maintenance programme for the A320ceo, A330ceo and A340 basic.
It assesses the robustness of the full pneumatic Engine Bleed Air System by detecting any drift of the main system
functions before failure. It allows airlines to schedule engine bleed air maintenance and to increase operational
reliability of the system.
This solution has been implemented through AMM tasks and uses existing tools. Tasks can be carried out during
scheduled checks and the intervals proposed by Airbus can be adapted depending on the airline’s experience.
Performing each task takes around two man hours.
The efficiency of this solution has been proven, and feedback received from airlines indicates that the operational
reliability of Engine Bleed Air Systems has considerably improved, and is no longer a major concern since the
introduction of this preventive maintenance.
Finally, to support airlines in Engine Bleed Air System Check implementation, Airbus has deployed an engineering
workshop including a demonstration on an aircraft.
For more information related to this workshop contact customerservices.consulting@airbus.com.
16#TSAF
90
Engine Bleed Air System
Recommendations in case of findings
If the check detects a drift from the dedicated thresholds of each function, additional
tests may be required to determine the root cause. Correcting this drift is advised to
ensure system operations until the next check.
The suspected component may be replaced immediately or at the next opportunity.
AMM Aircraft Maintenance Manual
BMC Bleed air Monitoring Computer Findings resulting from the check are not subject to immediate troubleshooting prior to
CMM Component Maintenance Manual dispatch. Operational considerations remain linked to the BMC monitoring logics
ECAM Electronic Centralised Aircraft Monitor (ECAM warning, maintenance status) and associated MMEL/TSM coverage.
MMEL Master Minimum Equipment List Based on the above, component removal can be scheduled at a later convenience
TSM Trouble Shooting Manual while monitoring the system’s drift through Class 3** messages.
Finally, components that are removed during this preventive maintenance programme
** Class 3 messages are of low urgency
Class 2 messages should be dealt should be sent for CMM test & repair. It is highly recommended to tag the reason for
with within 800 Flight Hours removal as “check removal” and to mention the paragraph of the AMM failure.
Class 1 messages are urgent, Supplying this information will ensure the correct reason for removal and will help
possibly NoGo, AOG
determine the appropriate repair of the component before return into service.
Engine Bleed Check workshop
To implement the Engine Bleed Check, customers can sign up for a workshop,
in the Engineering Workshop portfolio in the AirbusWorld Customer Services
e-catalogue.
This workshop comprises:
• Classroom sessions to review how the Engine Bleed Air System works
• A specific review of Operational Interruptions experienced by the airlines and how
to troubleshoot them
• Demonstrations on an aircraft, of how the Engine Bleed Check procedures should
be applied and the aim of each test done during the Bleed Check
Several airlines have already benefited from this service, finding it useful and efficient,
enabling them to reinforce their knowledge of the bleed air system and of preventive
actions to reduce the number of Operational Interruptions.
16#TSAF
01
A350 XWB
composite
Article by (left to right)
bonded
Sébastien HANSER
Embodiment Industrial Manager
AIRBUS
sebastien.hanser@airbus.com
Guillaume FERRER
repair
Embodiment Industrial Manager
AIRBUS
guillaume.ferrer@airbus.com
Sébastien DUPOUY
Embodiment Industrial Manager
AIRBUS
New technology for new aircraft sebastien.s.dupouy@airbus.com
Even if composite repairs are not new at Airbus, the extensive use of Carbon
Fibre Reinforced Plastic (CFRP) on the A350 XWB and especially on primary
non-removable parts, is driving the development and the industrialisation of
new composite-specific repair solutions.
Over the last two decades, generic solutions were used for damaged composite
components. Most of the affected parts were removable and located in
non-pressurised areas. The new challenge was to repair primary structures
without removing them from the aircraft and with minimal grounding time.
The solution had to restore the required structural capabilities, be carried out
on-site, and bring the exterior skin of the aircraft back to its original flush finish.
16#TSAF
11
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
What is CFRP?
The primary structure of the A350 XWB (Extra Wide Body) is of Carbon
Fibre Reinforced Plastic (CFRP). This composite has progressively replaced
aluminium in aircraft design over the past years, improving performance
(less weight for the required structural robustness), but also bringing
benefits such as increased resistance to impacts, simplified damage
assessment processes and proven repair solutions.
(See article in FAST#57)
Combining legacy and advanced innovative solutions
Different repair solutions exist, from the traditional bolted metallic doubler, to the
most advanced out-of-autoclave, on-wing, bonded repair. The ‘best-fit repair’
principle is used to select the choice of repair solution depending on the stress
requirements of the damaged area: if the damage affects structural elements,
then a metallic bolted solution or a bonded repair are the preferred methods.
Airbus uses its wide experience in building and repairing composite structures
to advise on the most appropriate solution to specific damage and repair
scenarios, based on the new requirements presented by the A350 XWB
structure. Bonded repair is adapted to customers’ specific requirements
and expectations, and in accordance with airworthiness conditions.
Adapting the repair type to the situation
The main drivers are always safety and lead time. The three composite repair
techniques available give different aerodynamic and aesthetic finishes:
Quick but temporary Permanent Permanent
bolted metallic bolted pre-cured bonded flush repair
doubler CFRP repair
Most commonly
(but not flush)
This will certainly fix an experienced in-service
AOG situation, bringing This is a permanent damage, such as severe
the aircraft back to pre-cured CFRP doubler lightning strikes or GSE
service very quickly without any additional impacts, can be
and safely. After a grace cosmetic or aero- repaired using the
period (life limitation), dynamic consideration. bonded method,
this efficient but visible enabling on-site repair
non-flush repair with a flush finish.
(external doubler) has
to be replaced by
a permanent repair.
A complex repair,
mixing bolted
and bonded
techniques
16#TSAF
21
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
A bonded repair… from start to finish
1)
Damage assessment
Before any engineering decision or repair action, a very precise
assessment is carried out, described and recorded in a damage
report.
Specific Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) equipment has been
developed for operational repair on the A350 XWB such as the
Line tool, Line sizing or Line mapping tools. These enable clear
identification, localisation and characterisation of the damage.
As the fuselage skin is a monolithic structure (a solid laminate
composite – see glossary), the NDT means that are used are
mainly ultrasonic detection such as A-Scan and C-Scan phased
array. (see FAST 57 for more information on CFRP damage and
NDT methods).
This assessment stage is essential for communicating precisely
with engineering teams and defining a fast and safe repair
solution.
2)
Damage removal
Once the repair definition is established, the working party team
removes damaged plies (layers) following a very precise pattern.
The damaged area is removed by cutting the CFRP skin using a
high-speed, diamond-coated cutter.
3)
Stepping design for bonded repair
The area in which the bonded repair is to be applied is
progressively sand-stepped or removed using a new system:
The Repair Jet®. The system, which has been specially
developed and qualified for the A350 XWB, uses pressurised
water that contains an abrasive media. The portability of the
Repair Jet® allows it to be used in areas where the repair’s
situation and ergonomics make it difficult or uncomfortable to
perform (lower shells, overhead working).
This process combines a precise set of parameters (pressure,
speed, nozzle design, media type…) to obtain the final result
(consistent depth machining).
Sand-stepping requires a high level of experience to match
the design engineering requirements (tolerances, orientations,
ply numbers).
The Repair Jet® allows clean and safe machining; the pressurised
water means that no carbon dust is generated, and that
temperature is not elevated, while the high precision of the jet
avoids ply delamination that can occur with other methods of
machining.
16#TSAF
31
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
4)
Surface preparation
Once the stepping has been completed, it is cleaned for optimal
bonding. An aircraft’s environment often presents elements that
could contaminate the bonding process such as fuel, hydraulic
liquids, mineral oil or wax. Using specific solvents the operator
chemically prepares the surface removing all sources of contami-
nation that could lead to misbonding.
5)
The water-break test
This test consists of applying a small quantity of water onto the
prepared surface (bonding area) and checking its physical
behaviour. The cleaning operation is repeated until the water
forms a continuous film on the surface to be repaired.
The aim of this test is to ensure the required cleanliness and
roughness of the surface required for optimal bonding.
6)
Thermal profile
To secure the final curing cycle, the thermal profile defines the
homogeneity of the repair zone cure cycle by controlling the
thermo-couples which are located at the edge of the repair zone.
A dummy patch (representative of the repair patch) is then placed
in the repair area, using a release film to avoid the dummy from
bonding. This dummy is equipped with thermo-couples to record
thermal mapping of the dummy and its relevant bonding line.
This task is a dry-run for curing, which validates the quality of the
vacuum bag thermal insulation.
7)
Repairing with pre-impregnated
materials and film adhesives
An adhesive film is placed into the whole prepared surface
(including the stepped area) before positioning the pre-
impregnated fabric or tape plies; the type of adhesive used
depends on the curing cycle and required thickness*.
Repair plies (fibres) are generally similar to the parent structure,
associated with a pre-impregnated resin dedicated to repair
solutions. These are laid out following the original orientation and
the stepped machining provides sufficient overlap to enable load
transfer between the existing structure and the repair patch.
The repair kit is prepared in a clean room which is located as
close as possible to the repair area.
This phase is key to restore the structural integrity of the
component or the structure.
*Another advantage of CFRP is that extra layers of composite
can be applied to areas that take more stress or are susceptible
to in-service damage (eg. door surrounds).
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
8)
Compaction
A compaction phase is used to consolidate cohesion between
the plies and to remove air bubbles before the final curing cycle.
This consolidation is another important phase during the ‘out-of-
autoclave’ repair process, as the repair will be submitted to less
pressure than traditional ‘in-autoclave’ manufacturing or repair
processes.
9)
Vacuum bagging (internal/external)
A vacuum bag is installed to maintain pressure on the plies during
the curing cycle. In a case where damage has
perforated the skin, a vacuum bag on both sides ensures vacuum
communication and tightness. Auxiliary material
such as vacuum bag, backing plate, breather fabric and peel
plies* are defined by the Aircraft Structure Repair (ASR)
instructions.
Vacuum bagging
Vacuum intake Vacuum register
Repair patch
Drilled backing plate
Vacuum intake Vacuum register
UW 1032 Bleeder GF180 Edge breather
Heating blanket Perforted parting film Sealant tape
Breather GF 180 Thermo couple Vacuum bag
Non-perforated parting film
10)
Cure cycle
The cure cycle for a repair corresponds with the processing
window that is appropriate for each material as indicated in its
corresponding Airbus specification. When more than one material
is included in an area (adhesive film, pre-impregnated fibres …),
the selected cure cycle must cover the processing window of all
of them. A specific curing cycle involving 2 temperature stages
has been developed in order to reach the required 140°C.
16#TSAF
41
16#TSAF
51
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
11)
Restoration of lightning strike protection
Expanded Copper Foil (ECF) which ensures the electrical bonding
protection against lightning strikes is integrated within the original
fuselage composite of the A350 XWB. During the composite
bonding repair this electrical continuity is re-instated by
overlapping the original ECF with a new ECF patch.
Original Dry
Expanded Copper Foil Expanded Copper Foil Repair materials Adhesive
12)
Internal bolted repair embodiment
Damaged internal structure is restored by observing the repair
definition given by Airbus design engineering, following generic
repair principles proposed in the ASR manual.
On most occasions these principles use spliced pre-defined
standard spare parts, that are bolted to the CFRP.
Specific drilling tools and processes must be used to install
pre-cured parts (stiffeners, clips, solid shims or internal doublers).
Each part that has been freshly cut (according to the repair
definition) must have its edge sealed to prevent galvanic corrosion
(Aluminium/CFRP).
13)
Final post repair inspections
before return to service
Before return to service, the repair area must be inspected using
standard NDI technics given in the Non-destructive Testing
Manual (NTM) and the ASR manual for the A350 XWB.
Both visual and ultrasonic (C-scan phased array) inspection
methods are performed according to the repair documentation’s
indications.
14)
System and internal equipment
re-installation
After completion of the structural repair, any systems
and equipment that needed to be removed in order to access
and repair the interior of perforating damage, are then re-installed
by the working party’s systems specialists, following Aircraft
Maintenance Manual (AMM) and ASR specific tasks.
16#TSAF
61
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
Repair on a flight test aircraft Carrying out a repair
It is important to note that each type
Capability demonstration of a combined repair on a flight test aircraft.
of repair requires specific training.
The bonded repair process has undergone a 3-year certification campaign, during In the case of bonded repairs,
which the pyramid of destructive and non-destructive tests ensured that the bonded there are three levels of knowledge
CFRP repair would withstand stress levels well beyond those in a real life, operational depending on the type of repair:
situation. Cosmetic, Advanced and Expert.
In addition, an Airbus working party then applied this repair technology to a flight test Operators can use Airbus working
aircraft in Toulouse, France. parties to carry out all levels of
repair. Further information on CFRP
Using a realistic scenario the repair team assessed and repaired the damage,
bonded repair training courses can
combining skin bonded repair & stringer bolted repair.
be found on AirbusWorld > AIRTAC
This innovative combination of best-fit repair principles addressed structural, > Airbus Engineering
aesthetic and aerodynamical constraints.
Monolithic structure Peel ply
This is a solid laminate A layer of open weave material, usually polyester,
composite such as CFRP fibreglass or heat-set nylon, applied directly to the surface
as opposed to carbon of an uncured prepreg or wet lay-up.
fibre composite/ It protects the surface to be bonded from contamination
honeycomb sandwich during manufacturing or repair operations. The peel ply is
structures. removed from the cured laminate immediately before
bonding operations, leaving a clean resin-rich surface that
needs no further preparation for bonding, other than
application of a primer where one is required.
16#TSAF
71
A350 XWB composite bonded repair
GLOSSARY
CONCLUSION
Airbus is constantly developing and improving repairability of its aircraft, proposing a set of innovative repair
solutions, special tooling and associated training.
With the arrival of Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic, widely used on the A350 XWB, technology has evolved
bringing an additional repair solution to match this material. Depending on the type of damage incurred, but
also on the result required in terms of lead-time and aesthetics, customers can now choose from three types
of composite repairs, from bolted metallic doubling to bolted pre-cured or bonded flush repair.
Technical data
for maintenance
Taking efficiency to new dimensions
With an ever-increasing responsibility to ensure
safe and efficient maintenance operations within
tighter lead times, the customer’s need for digitised
technical data has never been greater.
Customers expect high quality maintenance
documenta tion with easy access, an intuitive
interface and fast updates.
Article by
Airbus is investing in new technologies, to supply
Boris PLOTEAU
maintenance and engineering data not only in real- Customer Contract and Policy
Manager Technical Data
time, but to new levels of detail that enable quicker
AIRBUS
and more precise operations. boris.ploteau@airbus.com 16#TSAF
81
In recent years, the escalation of commercial flights has
put pressure on all aeronautical stakeholders to optimise
their maintenance operations:
• Reduced Turnaround Times have become key to an airline’s profitability,
and aircraft mechanics have less time to access, consult and interpret
maintenance documentation.
• Airworthiness authorities have become increasingly involved in
maintenance documentation, and regularly audit Airbus processes of
authoring, generating and delivering maintenance and engineering data.
As Type Certificate holder, Airbus provides its operators with Instructions for
Continued Airworthiness (ICA) to ensure compliance with EASA Part 21J, a
requirement for Design Organisations Approvals (DOA). Airbus defines and delivers
configured ICA when an aircraft is delivered and then continues to update the ICA
throughout its entire operational life.
In the first half of 2018, and based on a new EASA regulation, Airbus will designate
some ICA (e.g. AMM, IPC, ESPM and NTM), approved under DOA process.
This new regulation does not impact Airbus customers but entails even stronger
regulatory requirements concerning Airbus processes for data authoring and
validation. Customers in general will benefit from the approved nature of an Airbus
ICA when justifying an aircraft’s release under Part 145 to their National
Airworthiness Authorities.
Upon request, any National Airworthiness Authority can obtain access to Airbus’
maintenance and engineering data that is applicable to an aircraft registered with
them.
• At delivery, customers are increasingly involved in maintenance and
engineering data to ensure everything they need is available right from day
one of operations.
Airbus on-line technical data
500
168,000
wiring
customised
diagrams
documentation
sets
40
50,000
maintenance
Maintenance
procedures
& Engineering
manuals
16#TSAF
91
Technical data for maintenance
16#TSAF
02
Technical data for maintenance
Managing more information in less time
Before moving to full online delivery of technical data, Airbus used to deliver over
250,000 CDs or DVDs every year. Operators can now choose to download data via
a secure web-based interface, which both speeds up data delivery and reduces the
global CO footprint.
2
Today, Airbus customers access, consult and download data using the customer
portal, AirbusWorld, and do not receive any physical media. Customers can access
the portal via all devices and manage their documentation, customising the interface
by selecting specific aircraft and specific systems by ATA chapter. They can also
customise the AirbusWorld homepage to their own needs and methods of working
as well as manage and control the different databases used in their own intranet
environment. Consulting and downloading maintenance data from AirbusWorld is
done with one dedicated application: airnavX.
airnavX entered into service in April 2017, enabling the end-user to access and
download maintenance data, PDF manuals and software by simply using the
browser’s “Save as” function. Thanks to its simplicity the application has a high level
of reliability with no disruption.
A customer panel works with Airbus to test and develop new solutions, with 25
customers having participated in the development of airnavX. From the second half of
2018, customers will join the collaborative approach by using 3D animations, images,
videos and other smart media for aircraft maintenance on an online platform.
Access technical data
more efficiently
ecnanetniam
tfarcriA
atad
lacinhcet
airnavX
Customers handle a continuously increasing volume of information while having less
time in which to process it.
Airbus now offers airnavX as a reliable, fast, easy-to-use and efficient application to list,
download, browse and search Airbus technical data, without relying on external
browser plug-ins.
In the long term, airnavX will replace over ten existing applications. It is being deployed
gradually, the first step being the entry-into-service of airnavX My Library on April 2017.
airnavX My Library offers one single access point to list and download Airbus technical
data (maintenance, engineering and flight operations), as well as to browse specific
flight operations PDF documents.
The airnavX browsing function completes the scope of airnavX My Library with
additional features to search and browse the data, with a troubleshooting function
to retrieve the aircraft fault isolation procedure.
airnavX covers maintenance operations on the A380, A350 XWB, as well as A320 and
A330/A340 families, and replaces the following AirN@v products:
• AirN@v / Maintenance
• AirN@v / Line Maintenance (A350 XWB)
• AirN@v / Repair
• AirN@v / Associated data
In 2018, the scope of airnavX will be progressively extended.
16#TSAF
12
Technical data for maintenance
Ensuring up-to-date technical data
Customers can log all technical queries in • Troubleshooting manuals now incorporate any maintenance advice quoted
the TechRequest application, which in technical information documents, such as the Technical Follow-Up
enables traceability and follow-up document.
by Airbus and selected suppliers.
• Aircraft Maintenance Manuals have been optimised to include procedures
The requests are analysed and answered
coming from part suppliers, within Airbus’ procedure. The present focus is to
in this application.
include procedures that relate to unscheduled maintenance operations.
At the same time, Airbus uses this
• Structural Repair Manual has changed to a task-oriented layout, in order to
customer feedback to launch maturity
allow direct access and simple navigation to the repair procedure. Weight
initiatives to detect major and/or recurring
variant information has been reviewed to show only the most conservative
issues within the technical documentation.
variant.
Its static and flight test teams use the
maintenance data to detect and correct • Airbus Illustrated Parts Catalogue has been simplified to show only two
any issue prior to the delivery of data types of message for part interchangeability: ‘spares’, for direct
to the operator. This helps in improving interchangeability or ‘conditional spares’, requiring a condition to be met or
the completeness and accuracy of where mixing of the same part numbers is not allowed.
maintenance and engineering
• Airbus maintenance documentation is customised for each individual
documentation.
aircraft. Cabin and cargo information is by nature highly customised.
Airbus updates forthcoming documentation
To adhere to the new reinforced regulatory requirements, Airbus also optimises
for all impacted aircraft as required
the content of the Aircraft Maintenance Manual and the Illustrated Parts
and may provide the operators concerned
Catalogue documents for an efficient aircraft entry-into-service. This optimisation
with an update in advance, prior to the
includes exceptional revisions in addition to the contractual regular revisions.
next revision, avoiding re-occurrence
of major issues.
16#TSAF
22
Technical data for maintenance
Share smart media
for aircraft maintenance
airnaveo
airnaveo is an on-line collaborative platform to share smart media,
videos, 3D data, and images for aircraft maintenance.
This application will be available on AirbusWorld and linked to the
airnavX browser.
From a maintenance procedure, for example, the end-user will
have a media icon that opens a page with all available smart media
configured and applicable to this task. Videos from Airbus
engineering departments, describing the real maintenance use case,
images and all 3D animations will be available. Customers can then
load their own smart data into Airbus’ database. Airbus moderates
the data which may subsequently be shared with other customers.
Airbus is working with certifying authorities to allow this data to
become Airbus Instructions for Continued Airworthiness.
The pilot phase is planned for mid-2018.
Developing reliable, cost-efficient IT
Customers currently download and install maintenance and engineering data into their IT
environment, allowing them to share data internally, create Job Cards, attach airline proprietary
documents and re-author or customise Airbus data.
This data management often generates significant IT investments for operators. Airbus’ aim is
to reduce these investments by maintaining a high level of availability of the AirbusWorld portal,
using duplicated Airbus servers and a worldwide Content Delivery Network.
Future developments will include the ability to attach external documents, for example
engineering orders, and the option to edit data within Airbus’ online applications.
All these investments will allow the vast majority of Airbus operators to fully integrate their IT
environment online with AirbusWorld.
Establishing industry standards for data exchange
Airbus is actively participating in the development of the Civil Aviation Technical Data Exchange
standards, ATA Spec 2000, 2400 and 2500.
These standards allow aviation actors to build a single system for data coming from different
sources, establish a stable and agreed interface between the data supplier and the data
consumer, larger tool choice for users and lower cost for the whole industry.
The data exchange standards are already being integrated into Airbus processes and services.
An example of this is Service Bulletin (SB) reporting. Maintenance data is kept complete and
up-to-date by the operator reporting the embodiment of Service Bulletins to Airbus. Aircraft
operators used to record the embodiment in their Maintenance Information System (MIS) and
then report embodiments to Airbus via a specific application. The new standards mean that
Airbus can better interpret data from the MIS configuration chosen by the customer and
facilitate automated Service Bulletin reporting.
16#TSAF
32
Technical data for maintenance
From periodic to real-time updates
Airbus revises and delivers the main maintenance manuals every three months, with A350 XWB
and A380 manuals revised every month. Regular revision is especially important during the aircraft
delivery period; by mid-2019, Airbus plans to also revise the maintenance data every month for
A320 and A330 families. After the aircraft delivery period, the customer can decide whether to
maintain a monthly revision cycle or have quarterly revisions.
The next generation of Airbus documentation will provide real-time technical data. Instead of
periodic revisions, Airbus will update an online technical data repository as and when the revision
of data occurs or when an Airbus Service Bulletin (SB) has been reported. This will allow customers
to extract the latest version of the data at any time via a web application.
Airbus will start to implement this type of data access with wiring information. From one online
application, the end-user will be able to generate a complete electrical wiring schematic, configured
to the aircraft and completely replacing the Wiring Diagram Manual. This new application, called
GenEWIS, will provide the end-user with clearer readability of complex electrical systems.
The key enabler to switch to real-time technical data is the “state of the art” structure of such data.
With a smooth transition plan from 2020 to 2022, Airbus will migrate A320, A330, A340 and A380
maintenance data from ATA iSpec2200 to the latest industry standard S1000D, used today for
A350 XWB maintenance data.
This real-time technical data is a new philosophy for data consultation and exchange. Airbus will
collaborate with operators, Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) organisations, leasing
companies and of course airworthiness authorities in the development of this new system.
Generate electrical wiring
diagrams on demand
GenEWIS
(Generate Electrical Wiring Interconnection System)
Information on electrical components is delivered in sheets of
drawings; systems are split based on ATA breakdown via the
Aircraft Wiring Diagram (AWD). Depending on the system,
several sheets sometimes need to be printed and assembled.
The amount of data produced by wiring products is growing
exponentially and Airbus is transforming this information for
the benefit of operators.
Starting with the A350 XWB and from the beginning of 2019,
Airbus will provide a new dynamic view of electrical system
routing with GenEWIS.
The Aircraft Wiring List (AWL) database will be used as a
master to generate wiring diagrams on demand. The end-user
will have an interactive display capable of showing all electrical
systems, from very small subsets to much larger drawings.
Airbus’ intention is to improve the airlines’ efficiency during
electrical trouble-shooting activities, improve the system
configuration readability and improve Airbus’ capability to
provide more frequent electrical updates, everything being
based on the AWL database.
ecnanetniam
tfarcriA
atad
lacinhcet
16#TSAF
42
Technical data for maintenance
From manual consolidation to automatic data delivery
At Transfer of Title (TOT), operators receive from Airbus the Aircraft Inspection Report
(AIR), providing a snapshot of all relevant part numbers, serial numbers and functional
item numbers of the aircraft. Manual consolidation of this data is both time and
resource consuming for operators.
To support operators during the entry-into-service, Airbus proposes a unique
digital solution: Airbus Configuration of Tracked Units at Aircraft Level (ACTUAL).
This product is delivered online per aircraft and provides the airline maintenance
and engineering teams with a complete and organised view of all part numbers,
serial numbers, and functional item numbers of their aircraft.
Using the latest spec2000 XML format, ACTUAL avoids the risk of manual error and
offers a clear hierarchical structure of each operator’s aircraft configuration: the parts
are listed according to their function and position on the aircraft. ACTUAL gives airline
maintenance teams the ability to automatically load aircraft configuration data directly
into their Maintenance Information System.
The Illustrated Parts Catalogue provides end-users with part number information
including part interchangeability which can be complex, depending on the aircraft
system. From mid 2018, customers will be able to quickly retrieve the part number
applicable to one aircraft at a specific location, thanks to a new tool called
ALLOWABLE. The customer will then be able to extract all this information in
eXtended Mark-up Language (XML) for direct integration in their Maintenance
Information System allowing the end-user to refer directly to the airline system
to get the part number information.
ecnanetniam
tfarcriA
atad
lacinhcet
Keep electrical load
data up-to-date
ELA Update (Electrical Load Analysis)
Aircraft increasingly rely on electrically driven components and circuits on their most vital
systems.
Airbus help operators manage the electrical load of their aircraft and supports them to meet
regulatory requirements. With the ELA Update service, Airbus provides operators with a
revised ELA based upon all reported electrical changes on their aircraft since delivery.
With ELA Update, Airbus will analyse the impact of an operator’s reported Service Bulletins
and/or Supplementary Type Certificates and provide them with an updated ELA.
Airbus has also developed a new training course on ELA Update, to provide airline
engineering teams with all the skills and knowledge needed to update electrical load
documentation by themselves.
Technical data is key for efficiently operating an airworthy aircraft.
Airbus continuously monitors technological developments and applies
them to documentation and Information Systems’ functionalities,
production and methods of transmission.
Based on end-user feedback, Airbus is constantly enhancing content by
improving the clarity and accuracy of maintenance and engineering data.
By investing in new solutions, Airbus is looking to minimise technical data
management for operators.
The new browser, airnavX, has been developed to ease consultation of
this data, allowing operators to have one fast and reliable application to
access the vast majority of maintenance and engineering data. Latest
industrial standards are used to deliver and exchange the data with the
aircraft operators.
Online access and consultation will continue to be the major axis of
improvement for the years to come. Collaborative platforms are being put
in place to share information and smart media.
Airbus is working on the future, with a real-time technical data concept
that allows the end-user continuous access to the latest version of
maintenance data.
16#TSAF
52
Technical data for maintenance
Get enhanced overview of
aircraft SB configuration
ACM+ (Aircraft Configuration Matrix)
An aircraft’s configuration changes throughout its lifecycle, with upgrades and retrofits
carried out via Airbus Service Bulletins or Vendor Service Bulletins.
To follow every modification and its impacts on maintenance manuals, customers can
use the ACM+ service to have a comprehensive view of their aircraft SB configuration
associated to a global traceability of SB status.
The aircraft transfer process between two entities always requires significant
configuration checks: the ACM+ allows customers to save time during those crucial
moments.
Since the beginning of 2017, the ACM+ enables customers to have all configuration
and applicable Service Bulletins’ status in one place.
This enhanced version of the ACM contains, when applicable, valuable complementary
data such as the references of safety publications associated to SBs, e.g.
Airworthiness Directives or Operations Engineering Bulletins. The ACM+ also indicates
SBs originating from Vendor SBs and SBs requested by the customer. It provides the
date of the SB reporting to Airbus and the reference when reported online.
CONCLUSION
16#TSAF
62
A350 XWB
vertical stabiliser
continuous joint
Precision technology for attachment fittings
The A350 XWB now uses a more optimal way of connecting
the stabiliser to the fuselage using a continuous joint.
This in turn has led to a new and more precise way for
customers to measure bolt tension.
Article by
Raquel HERNANDEZ-GONZALEZ
A350 XWB In-Service/Maturity Manager
Chief Engineering Office
AIRBUS
raquel.hernandez-gonzalez@airbus.com
16#TSAF
72
A350 XWB vertical stabiliser continuous joint
This new A350 XWB design concept provides a more
evenly distributed transfer of loads along the joint
between the vertical stabiliser and fuselage.
The fuselage interface includes a set of tension and shear fittings that continuously
connects the shells, stringers and spars of the vertical stabiliser centre-box to the skin
and frames of the unpressurised rear fuselage structure.
The optimised load distribution in the joint reduces requirements for redundancies in
each bolt compared to the classic multi-lug concept. This allows better stress control
and reduces structural weight, improving fuel performance as a consequence.
In addition, with no external fairing required thanks to the joint, there is less drag which
again contributes to fuel efficiency.
Traditional lug attachment Tension bolt system
In previous aircraft families, the attachment principle of the vertical stabiliser
consisted of a multi-lug joint assembled with tapered bolts and sleeves.
This A350 XWB design enabled the development of a new torque system using the
latest ultrasonic technology for tension measurement.
The ability to measure more accurately led to reduced tolerance margins taken in the
definition of the continuous joint and more precision when monitoring its situation once
in-service.
T10 T9 T8 T7 T6 T5 T4 T3 T2 T1
FR94 FR95 FR96 FR97 FR98
T20 T19 T12 T11
T18 T17 T16 T15 T14 T13
The A350 XWB vertical stabiliser is held in place with 20 tension bolts
that optimise the load distribution over a continuous joint.
A350 XWB vertical stabiliser continuous joint
16#TSAF
82
The tension bolts are standard parts, and are installed at the inner side of the vertical
stabiliser skin. The diameter of the bolts in each frame is different depending on the
P[kN] load to be supported.
These bolts are pre-loaded with nominal tension values in accordance with design
specifications. The tension value in the joint is defined by taking into consideration
a relaxation of the preload values, to a certain extent, during the first days after
installation. The preload of the tension bolts is monitored during operational life.
This monitoring has been included as a mandatory task of Airworthiness Limitation
Section Part 2 of the A350 XWB Maintenance Programme, and is performed every
3600 flight cycles or 3 years whichever comes sooner.
When conducting this maintenance task, preload values per location and temperature
of the joint should be noted. Minimal nominal preload values for each frame location
-3a2re° Cdifferent and are dependent on temp2e0ra°tuCre because tension bolt material
expansion influences ultrasonic measurement and the value has to be adapted to the
material’s thermal expansion coefficient. The principle of this behaviour is shown in the
following graph. Depending on the preload value found when measuring, operators
have to proceed accordingly.
Bolt calibration data principle
Tension bolts for the A350 XWB vertical stabiliser and fuselage continuous joint have a
sensor on their head that can be read by an ultrasonic measuring device. This ultrasonic
device allows precise control when preloading the bolt during installation on the Final
Assembly Line.
The precision of ultrasonic measurement enables the use of smaller diameters, thereby
increasing structural strength, compared to tension bolts without sensors. If the
measurement when applying the load is more precise, the required tolerance is lower.
In the past, high tolerance levels have been given for pre-tension values due to the
friction during load application.
This method also allows the use of a simple measurement tool during required
maintenance checks that is key for guaranteeing the required bolt preload value
for the continuous joint’s in service performance.
Bolt Calibration Data (BCD) is needed to adjust the tension value measured in line with
the specific physical properties of the bolt and its behaviour (how it elongates) under
load and temperature. This data for each bolt’s characteristics is provided by the
supplier. The data is retrieved by the tool thanks to the Identification (ID) Number
embedded in the sensor.
?esaelp
seulav
eht
evah
ew
nac
No action
GP? allowed
as per MP?
Contact Airbus
depending
on values
62°C
-32°C 20°C
notwenolik
)Nk(P
eulav
daolerP
No further action required
Maintenance to be planned
as per procedure
Maintenance required
62°C
Preload measurement principle
Time
Echo Pulse
During tightening: • Tension bolt elongates with load
Sensor
• Time between pulse and echo increases with load
Change in time is directly proportional to load
Ultrasonic
wave
16#TSAF
92
A350 XWB vertical stabiliser continuous joint
These sensors are equipped with a 2-dimensional bar code which contains a
12-digit ID, so that every bolt is uniquely identified.
This ID is specific to each individually manufactured bolt and corresponds with that
bolt’s data on an automatic database, called Bolt Calibration Data (BCD), which
contains all information relevant to the traceability of the bolt (lot number, bolt
manufacturer, date of calibration, characteristics of the raw material, etc…).
This database is uploaded to the measurement tool which compares the time of an
ultrasonic wave travelling in the material, to establish the tension value of the bolt.
16#TSAF
03
A350 XWB vertical stabiliser continuous joint
Vertical stabiliser installation overview and management A350 vertical stabiliser tension bolt
delivery procedure
of bolt calibration data in Airbus
The new continuous joint concept, along with the ultrasonic measurement of the Manufacturing company
tension bolts, required a new approach to the installation of the vertical stabiliser
Manufacturing
in the Final Assembly Line.
of the mechanical elements
The A350 XWB’s vertical stabiliser is installed with a specific sequence on the (forging, machining…)
tightening of the tension bolts depending on their location. The tool used for tightening
is uploaded with the Bolt Calibration Data. It then automatically reads the ID of the bolt
and applies the correct load related to the specific location and the temperature
measured. Calibration company
The preload values, ID and location of each of the twenty tension bolts are recorded Placing the piezoelectric sensor
following a specific work order. The IDs are then provided to the customer in the
Product Quality Report (PQR) that is delivered with aircraft documentation.
Calibration of the bolt batch
After installation, the preload value is measured again after 12 hours to check that
(regular speed of the ultrasonic wave
the values are above the nominal ones after the expected preload relaxation.
with no pre-load)
The BCD is updated with newly manufactured bolts and the files comprising the BCD
are cumulative files that contain all data of tension bolts manufactured by the supplier
(see boxes to the right).
Manufacturing company
In order to ensure proper management of the BCD associated to the tension bolt’s
logistic management within the FAL, a dedicated team ensures that this data is Lubrication of the bolt
and batch delivery
uploaded to the applicable tools. The Airbus Customer Services team then publishes
it in AirbusWorld, the customer portal.
AIRBUS
Ensuring in-service support for customers Reception with Quality conformance
inspection in accordance with ABS
To enable airlines to perform this scheduled maintenance task, Airbus has defined the
reference standard documentation
necessary support means for monitoring the preload value of tension bolts in the
vertical stabiliser’s continuous joint. This support is covered by Airn@v Maintenance, Batch with appropriate package
Ground Support Equipment (GSE) and other data such as the BCD. and documentation plus
Bolt Calibration Data
How to measure the preload value
The maintenance procedure required of airlines is a Special Detail Inspection (SDI)
on which the preload of the tension bolts is to be measured every 3600 flight cycles
or 3 years, whichever occurs first. This SDI procedure is the reference MP A350-A-55-
3X-XX-02001-301A-A in the Airn@v Maintenance. This procedure requires that the
aircraft is in a hangar to maintain stabilised temperature across the structure assembly
due to the preload’s dependence on temperature.
Access to the area is through the door on S19, with installed platforms and a ladder
to reach tension bolts on the S19 top frames.
Difference in pressure probe for bar code
The measurement tool which is prepared with a Pre-Load Indication (PLI) system is
scanning and load measurement
the LoadMaster 3600 (LM3600). This tool, once uploaded with the BCD, is able to
start the process to read the preload value. The tool is then calibrated before carrying
out the bolt measurement, following the appropriate indications provided in the GSE
user guide.
When using the probe of the measurement system, the sensor should be very clean
and the approach to the tension bolt sensor should be done in two steps: first bar-
code scanning and second, load measurement. The difference between these steps is
in the pressure applied to the probe on the sensor as shown in the figure to the right.
16#TSAF
13
A350 XWB vertical stabiliser continuous joint
Frame temperature Bar code reader
measurement tool and ultrasonic
load measurement tool
The LM3600 measurement tool has a temperature sensor that should be located in
Measurement of location temperature the frame of the tension bolts to be measured.
Once the measurements have been done, the preload values and ID of the tension
bolts should be noted in the report included in the Maintenance Procedure (MP).
The completed report should be sent back to Airbus (mpdtask.reports@airbus.com).
If measured values in-service are found to be outside of the recommended ones as
per design, the re-torque of tension bolts needs performing to restore the nominal
values. Depending on the specific value, this action should be undertaken in a different
timeframe, following the indications provided in Airbus publications. Airlines can either
purchase or lease the required GSE as per MP A350-A-55-3X-XX-02001-301A-A in
Airn@v Maintenance.
The full MP A350-A-55-3X-XX-02001-301A-A can be done within two days with two
mechanics. Customers can consult a dedicated video covering the topic on AirbusWorld.
Airbus also offers airlines specific working parties to conduct both measuring and
tightening as required. Operators can request via: embodiment-operations@airbus.com.
The Airbus working party will provide tailored services including GSE provisioning.
Feedback for enhanced support
Airlines can benefit from enhanced support by reporting the MP A350-A-55-3X-XX-
02001-301A-A inspection to Airbus, including the preload measurements and the
basic values for conditions of measurement. This reporting allows Airbus to gather
data from the field to enhance in-service support for airlines, as well as contributing
to the Airbus global fleet-monitoring database.
This information, coupled with data already generated by Airbus, will enable an
informed analysis of whether the relaxation of the preload value over time correlates
with test data. If sufficient data is gathered and with positive results, the objective
is to increase the inspection interval for preload value checks of A350 XWB
in-service aircraft.
CONCLUSION
The new design concept for the A350 XWB vertical stabiliser enables a more even load distribution and
contributes to fuel efficiency thanks to improved stress management, reduced drag and weight loss.
Tension bolts are now used to connect the stabiliser to the fuselage and ultrasonic technology enables precise
measuring of the bolt preload value. Operators can carry out the measuring and any necessary adjusting
themselves or request support from Airbus. Further details can be found in Airn@v Maintenance on the Airbus
World customer portal.
16#TSAF
23
Suppor ting
ageing
Article by (left to right)
Isabelle REMAURY-LANDO
fleets A330/340 Family Programme Support Manager
AIRBUS
isabelle.remaury-lando@airbus.com
Delphine MEUNIER
A300/310 Family Programme Support Manager
AIRBUS
Scheduling the unscheduled delphine.meunier@airbus.com
Hugo Alberto QUIJANO FIALLOS
A320 Family Programme Support Manager
AIRBUS
hugo-alberto.quijano-fiallos@airbus.com
There are currently around 10,000 Airbus
aircraft in-service, with the whole fleet
growing at an increasingly faster rate.
And the ageing Airbus fleet is set to more
than triple over the next 10 years.
These aircraft require particular attention.
Airbus has carried out in-depth studies
to address ageing issues in terms of risk
evaluation, anticipation and appropriate
mitigations.
DSG
Design
Service
Goal
Entry ESG
Into Aircraft lifecycle Extended
Service Service Goal
Early years Maturity Ageing
16#TSAF
33
Supporting ageing fleets
Airbus fleet age profiles
700
600
500
400
300
A300/A310
200 A320 Family
100 A330/A340
0
900 2027 projection
800
6,655 aircraft ≥ 15 years
700
600 4,044 aircraft ≥ 20 years
500
400
300
200
100
0
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35 37 39 41 43 45
Airbus considers that an ageing aircraft is one that has been in service for around
15 years and/or has reached half of its Design Service Goal (DSG) limit.
Operators looking to keep their aircraft in service as long as possible can benefit
from different support:
Extending the aircraft life
The aircraft life can be extended beyond its original recommended limit, in line with
Airbus recommendations or ESG (Extended Service Goal)
Once an aircraft is in service, it accumulates Flight Cycles (FC) and Flight Hours (FH)
up to the “Design Service Goal”, meaning the point up to which the maintenance
programme has been validated. However, aircraft can actually be operated beyond
this point if the ESG – Extended Service Goal – has been applied.
Refer to page 37
for more about
the definition
of service goals.
Anticipating for areas affected by ageing
Being able to foresee ageing issues and thereby plan maintenance in advance is key
and Airbus has been working alongside airlines to anticipate their needs. The areas
affected by ageing are the aircraft structure, which result in fatigue and corrosion,
and systems performance.
tfarcria
fo rebmuN
tfarcria
fo
rebmuN
End 2017
2,026 aircraft ≥ 15 years
1,137 aircraft ≥ 20 years
1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35
Aircraft age in years
Aircraft age in years
16#TSAF
43
Supporting ageing fleets
Structure: facing fatigue
The accumulation of Flight Cycles (FC) and Flight Hours (FH) can cause cracks in fatigue-sensitive areas.
Specific inspections have therefore been introduced in the maintenance programme. In addition, the risk
assessment helps anticipate potential aircraft ground-time overrun, and provides visibility to assist
management decision-making.
To anticipate specific maintenance on ageing aircraft, Airbus made a
complete review of all mandated fatigue-related inspections which were
part of the Airworthiness Limitation Section (ALS) Part 2, published
inspections resulting from fatigue; this review was based on fatigue test
results and customer in-service feedback.
It focused on Airworthiness Limitation Items (ALI) identified with high
finding rates and complex repairs requiring a significant time to embody.
The result was the development of pre-defined repair solutions, spares,
tools and hardware provisioning in anticipation of customers’ needs.
To identify fatigue-crack critical areas, Airbus established a specific process
that provides continuous assessment of the fleet:
Step 1 Risk versus in-service effect
Airbus calculates the probability of findings at fleet level and assesses repair
complexity in case of findings
Step 2 Optimisation of inspections
and definition of solutions
Based on the critical findings from step 1, an analysis is launched to see if
there are opportunities for:
• Optimisation of inspection thresholds and intervals
• Forward fit and retrofit modifications
• Additional repair solutions taking into account already
available repair solutions
Once identified, those areas still judged as highly critical are retained
and taken to step 3
16#TSAF
53
Supporting ageing fleets
Step 3 Implementation of solution
For each of the previous identified areas of improvements/
opportunities, the final step is to secure:
• Inspection documentation update with appropriate threshold and interval
• Modification development and certification
• Development of new repair solutions in various formats such as Structural
Repair Manual (SRM) update, Pre-Defined repair Solutions (PDS), single
part replacement
Finally for these actions, associated material availability is reviewed accordingly.
The detailed content of the kits depends on the type of finding, the initial
configuration of the aircraft and any repairs already performed in the area.
Consequently, to avoid work stoppage during maintenance checks, Airbus has
speculated on the most probable configurations of kits and stocked them in
SATAIR warehouses.
Structure: coping with corrosion
Similarly to the above fatigue-related methodology, Airbus reviewed more
than 40,000 inspection reports coming mainly from Maintenance Planning
Document (MPD) inspections and reports relating to corrosion findings.
As an illustration of the analysis, Airbus were able to confirm for
A330/A340 Family and A320 Family that 80% of the reported findings
come from only 20% of the total number of existing inspection tasks.
Airbus is currently focusing on:
• Effectiveness of modification (monitoring)
• Spares availability
• Repair/Allowable Damage Limit (ADL) improvements
• Continued monitoring of the in-service fleet findings in the coming years
to adapt recommendations and maintenance tips
To ensure that this fleet monitoring is based on representative in-service
data, Airbus encourages operators to report inspection results to them,
such as no findings, or findings within and above the ADL.
16#TSAF
63
Supporting ageing fleets
Systems: recommendations and solutions
Aircraft systems are reviewed in order to establish appropriate The outcome of this A330/A340 working group confirmed for
actions that limit the effects of ageing. all identified topics that either:
As agreed with airlines, the main system operational drivers to • The topic is already known and the solution is available
focus on were:
• The topic is already known and Airbus is currently working
ATA 21/36 - Air systems on defining a solution or maintenance recommendation.
Discussions continue between airlines and Airbus to follow
ATA 27- Flight Controls
up activities related to these topics
ATA 28 – Fuel systems
• The topic is a non-issue and airlines agreed no engineering
ATA 29 – Hydraulic systems activities should be pursued.
ATA 32 – Landing Gear systems Finally, it was also demonstrated that there is no apparent
ageing effect on components which are often removed from
For the A300/A310 Family, as requested by operators during
aircraft and maintained through shop activities (overhaul).
the 2015 symposium in Berlin, best practices and preventive
maintenance actions have been compiled (refer to A300/A310
Example:
ISI 00.00.00194 in AirbusWorld).
The main area of concern is around items remaining on the
Best practices and preventive maintenance actions have also
aircraft (e.g. hydraulic/fuel line…), for which a number of
been compiled for the A320 Family and presented to the
maintenance tips and recommendations are already
operators during the 2017 symposium in Berlin (refer to A320
available through Airbus WISE Knowledge Management
ISI 00.00.00248 in AirbusWorld).
system (ISI articles as shown in below illustration
Similarly, for the A330/A340 Family, a FAIR Face-to-Face – A330/A340 ISI 29.00.00160
working group with airlines was launched in 2016. Following a – A320 ISI 29.00.00012).
review of recommendations already published in WISE articles/
ISIs and after further discussions with airlines, very few
additional areas of investigation were identified.
GLOSSARY A300/A310 Family symposium
ADL Allowable Damage Limit (2015, Berlin)
Solutions for Ageing Aircraft
ALI Airworthiness Limitation Item
ALS Airworthiness Limitation Section
DSG Design Service Goal
ESG Extended Service Goal
FC Flight Cycles
A330/A340 Family Americas
FH Flight Hours
Regional conference
ISG Intermediate Service Goal
(2016, Miami)
ISI In-Service Information Supporting ageing fleet,
ISB Inspection Service Bulletin Extended Service Goal and
MPPT Maintenance Programme Publication Trigger Widespread Fatigue Damage
MRBR Maintenance Review Board Report
WISE World In-Service Experience
>AirbusWorld
A320 >Content Library
Family >Maintenance & Engineering
ageing
support
16#TSAF
73
Supporting ageing fleets
Defining service limits
When previous Airbus programmes were launched, aircraft were certified with an
objective to reach a specific Design Service Goal (DSG), defined in terms of Flight
Cycles or Flight Hours (refer to table below).
In order to support Airbus aircraft which were actually reaching their DSG limit faster
than anticipated, Airbus launched appropriate engineering studies to certify an increase
in FH for some aircraft types: this was called the Intermediate Service Goal (ISG).
Studies continued for the Extended Service Goal (ESG) for additional life extension.
The table below gives the values for DSG, ISG and ESG.
Airbus Extended Service Goal packages can enable operators to increase the
operational lifetime in terms of flight hours and flight cycles. This can bring up to 10
years or more of additional revenue service above the initial design objectives.
Another limitation was also introduced by the FAA in the frame of the FAR26 new
regulation on widespread fatigue damage topic: Limit of Validity (LoV) which is not to
be mistaken with the DSG/ISG/ESG definition as it has no relation to this limit.
These definitions have been completed by a new term which is being used in the
Airworthiness Limitation Section documents: the Maintenance Programme
Publication Trigger (MPPT) which is the equivalent to former DSG/ISG/ESG
depending on the aircraft configuration.
DSG ISG ESG
FC FH FC FH FC FH
A300 B2 48,000 52,000 NA NA 48,000 75,000
A300 B4-100 40,000 53,000 NA NA 48,000 75,000
A300 B4-200 / C4 / F4 34,000 70,000 NA NA 48,000 75,000
A300-600 30,000 67,500 NA NA 51,000 89,000
A310 35,000 60,000 NA NA 40,000 116,000
A318 48,000 60,000 NA NA NA NA
A319 48,000 60,000 60,000 120,000
A320 48,000 60,000 37,500 80,000 60,000 120,000
A321 48,000 60,000 60,000 120,000
Pending certification planned Q1 2018
A330-200 (WV 000 and WV 020 series) 40,000 60,000 33,000 100,000 40,000* 130,000
*A330 (WV000 & 020) FC limit for aircraft structure is 44,000 FC
A330-300 (WV 000 and WV 020 series) 40,000 60,000 33,000 100,000 40,000* 126,000
TBD: Engineering activities starting mid-2018 for A330 WV050
(ESG objectives similar to A330 basic) A330 (WV 50 series) 33,000 100,000 NA NA TBD TBD
TBC: To be confirmed if required depending on A340-500 /600 A330neo 33,000 100,000 NA NA TBD TBD
future operations A340-200 20,000 80,000 20,000 100,000 25,000 134,000
A340-300 (WV 000 and 020 series) 20,000 80,000 20,000 100,000 31,000 156,000
A340-300 (WV 50 series) 20,000 100,000 NA NA TBD TBD
A340-500/600 16,600 100,000 TBC TBC TBC TBC
E.g. Describing a customer’s A340-200
- Previous terminology: The aircraft had a DSG of 20,000 FC and 80,000 FH. This could then be extended
to an ISG of 20,000 FC and 100,000 FH by implementing Service Bulletin (SB) A340-00-4065, then to an
ESG of 25,000 FC and 134,000 FH by implementing SB A340-00-4001 if the operator wanted.
- New terminology: The aircraft has an MPPT value. This is equivalent to the former DSG, ISG or ESG
values and depends on aircraft configuration (pre or post the above SBs).
CONCLUSION
As an aircraft ages, it is likely to require attention to its structure and systems. Anticipating potential findings,
repair solutions and parts availability can significantly contribute to optimising maintenance planning and to
ensuring aircraft availability.
Airbus engineering teams have identified the main structural areas to focus on. Modifications and repair
solutions are already available or in development. On the systems side, in cooperation with airlines,
Airbus has developed maintenance best practices and recommendations to better manage ageing fleets.
Recommendations and solutions have been communicated to Airbus customers via regular meetings or are
available in the AirbusWorld portal. Airbus continues to monitor and strongly support ageing aircraft in order
to respond to customers’ needs and expectations.
egatireH
etaroproC
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
otohP
FAST
from the past
There wouldn’t be any future
without the experience of the past.
Not so very long ago in 1985, the first Carbon Fibre Reinforced Plastic
vertical tail spar box for the A310-A300 started series production
at the Messerschmitt Bölkow-Blohm stabiliser plant in Germany.
The component is nine metres high, 3.1 metres wide at the bottom
and 1.4 metres wide at the top. At the time, it was the largest primary
structure ever developed and manufactured for a civil aircraft.
16#TSAF
83
06#TSAF
34
Around the clock, around the world
Airbus has more than 300 field representatives, based in over 130 cities
Technical, Material & Logistics
USA/CANADA Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Spares RTN/USR, WSP and HMV Orders
Tel: +1 703 834 3484 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400
For Europe, Africa, Middle East,
Fax: +1 703 834 3464 Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500
Asia-Pacific & China: Please contact your
airtac@airbus.com
dedicated Single Point of Contact (SPOC).
CHINA
More info:
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 AOG Spares Centre of Competence
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162
For Europe, Africa, Middle East, Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
Asia-Pacific & China: ifd.spares@airbus.com
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001
ADMINISTRATION For Americas:
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936 Please contact your dedicated
aog.spares@airbus.com
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964 Single Point of Contact (SPOC).
For Americas: More info:
Tel: +1 70 3729 9000 cod.americas@airbus.com
Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
aog.na@airbus.com
Training centres
Airbus Training Centre Airbus Training Centre Americas Training by Airbus Jakarta
Toulouse, France Miami, Florida - U.S.A. antoine.renaud@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 82 24 Tel: +1 (305) 871-3655 (switchboard)
or +33 (0)5 61 93 39 75 Fax: +1 305 871 4649 Airbus Asia Training Centre Singapore
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094 miamicustomertrainingsales@airbus.com Tel: +65 6877 4300 (reception)
training.commercial@airbus.com contact.info.aatc@airbus.com
customercare.atc-europe@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Beijing
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 - 3017/3016 Airbus Mexico Training Centre
Airbus Maintenance + 86 10 80 48 65 Tel: +52 55 57 86 80 50
Training Centre (communication and marketing)
Hamburg, Germany Airbus Training Centre Bangalore training.commercial@airbus.com
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288 Tel: 91-080-6638230 (reception)
Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8598 Training by Airbus Korea,
training.commercial@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Delhi Seoul, South Korea
atc.hamburg@airbus.com Tel: +91 9880065511 Tel: +82 (0)32 882 5425
andrew.rapson@airbuskorea.com
Airbus Material Management Training Training by Airbus Dubai,
Global Availability UAE - Airbus Middle East FZE Dubai
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 1228 Tel: +971 4 602 78 62
spares.training@airbus.com mary-knoll.garcia@airbus.com
16#TSAF
93
LESS FUEL.
FLY
WE MAKE IT
At 4000nm the A321LR has the biggest
range of any new single aisle aircraft
in the world. Not only is it capable
of opening the door to the long-haul
market, it can do so with an incredible
30% reduction in operating costs.
But it’s not just designed to impress
CFOs with unbeatable fuel effi ciency.
It is available with our state-of-the-art
Airspace cabins to give passengers
unparalleled comfort too.
Long-haul. We make it fl y.
airbus.com
14031_AIR_A321LR_TIME ZONES_297x210mm_Master_1.4.indd 1 01/03/2018 10:14
