Airbus technical magazine
August 2016
#58
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
The choice is yours
FAST 2016 QTR 2
- 25 years of flight operational commonality
- Flight recorders data inspection
FAST 2016 QTR 1 FAST October 2015 FAST 2015 QTR 4
- Virtual Reality & 3D for Technical Data A330 Family Overview - TAT Optimizer
- Augmented Reality in Airbus Incremental Development - ACE by name, ACE by nature
FAST 2015 QTR 3 FAST 2015 QTR 2 FAST 2015 QTR 1
- Managing airframe aerodynamic performance - Stealthy building panels - Ground Support Equipement and tools
- L-ion batteries - Head-Up Display system - Scheduled maintenance requirements
FAST 2014 QTR 4 FAST 2014 QTR 3 FAST 2014 QTR 2
- Additive layer manufacturing - Structure Health Monitoring - Telemetry Centre
- Inflatable tents for engine maintenance - Importance of reporting event from the field - Greener solutions: cleaner chemicals
Special Edition
FAST magazine is also available as a media-enriched app,
downloadable to the tablet of your choice.
85#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#58
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Chief Editor: Emma MUNDAY ALVARADO
Flight operational commonality 04
Design: PONT BLEU
Celebrating 25 years
Cover image: Hervé Gousset
Printer: Amadio
Flight recorders 12
Authorisation for reprinting data inspection
FAST magazine articles
Simpler testing methods
should be requested by email:
fast.magazine@airbus.com
VIP Kit solutions 16
FAST magazine is available on internet
to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
www.airbus.com/support/publications
and on tablets
OPTIMA 24
ISSN 1293-5476
Optimisation of Performance by Task Interval
Maintenance Assessment
© AIRBUS 2016 SWITS 30
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified Health monitoring 36
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any and prognostics
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
FAST from the past 42
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for Around the clock, 43
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence around the world
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Where you see these icons,
Photo copyright Airbus videos or slide shows are available
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Group Corporate Heritage, Master Films, on the iPad, Android & Windows
Céline Sadonnet, Philippe Masclet, Hervé Goussé, A.Doumenjou, app versions of FAST magazine.
ACJ cabin design and illustrations courtesy of Plus 33 Design Studio
85#TSAF
40
Celebrating 25 years
of flight operational
commonality between Airbus
fly-by-wire aircraft
With the inception of the A320,
Airbus laid the foundation for
a truly integrated family of aircraft
with synergies in the area of flight training
and operations. The application of a coherent cockpit
design philosophy and the use of fly-by-wire technology
throughout have been key in achieving this.
Airlines that operate several members of the family
are thus able to reduce flight training expenditure
and to increase pilot productivity, gaining a competitive
edge over operators of disparate fleets.
85#TSAF
50
25 years of flight operational commonality
Article by A brief history of Airbus flight operational commonality
When, four years after the A320, the A340 took to the sky in 1991, it became possible
Gerrit VAN DIJK
for the very first time to benefit from extensive cockpit, systems and handling com-
Technical Marketing Director
monality between a short-range 150 seater and a long-range widebody aircraft twice
Aircraft Operations
its size. Until then, so-called flight operational commonality had been a design feature
Customer Affairs
of aircraft of comparable configuration and mission capability only, such as the A300/
AIRBUS
A310 Family or 737 series.
gerrit.van-dijk@airbus.com
The A340 incorporated the A320’s pioneering digital fly-by-wire controls and glass
Contact for Operator Difference cockpit layout with side sticks instead of yokes. Airbus has used this technology in all
Requirement (ODR) and Operational subsequent programmes as well, offering a consistent man-machine interface across
Suitability Data (OSD) requests: the A320, A330, A340 families, A350 XWB and A380.
Régine VADROT
Head of Training and Operational Certification The importance of fly-by-wire and ECAM
Engineering - Product Integrity
Airbus fly-by-wire aircraft have electrical rather than mechanical signalling of primary
AIRBUS
flight controls:
regine.vadrot@airbus.com
• The pilot’s input to the control surfaces is sent via a side stick
and rudder pedals through computers that use control laws
• Control laws convert this input into an aircraft response
and largely determine the aircraft’s handling characteristics
Fly-by-wire enables handling and procedures similarity between aircraft as far apart as
the two-engine A320 and the seven times heavier four-engine A380.
Pilots receive systems information through an Electronic Centralised Aircraft Monitor or
ECAM, the heart of any Airbus glass cockpit. If a malfunction occurs, the ECAM
displays the fault and lists the actions required of the crew. The read-and-do approach
that follows facilitates the harmonisation of abnormal and emergency procedures,
even though systems behaviour may vary somewhat from one aircraft type to another.
STR Same Type Rating and Single Fleet Flying
Flight operational commonality between a basic aircraft model and its lengthened/
Same Type Rating
shortened fuselage variants can be virtually total. A good example is the single-aisle
A single licence endorsement A320 Family comprised of the A318, A319, A320 and A321. In addition to sharing the
for related aircraft sharing same Type Certificate, these models have been assigned a Same Type Rating (FAA
the same Type Certificate. designation) or single pilot licence endorsement (EASA terminology).
True for any two Airbus models sharing a Same Type Rating, pilots qualified on one of
them need only a few hours of e-learning to fly the other model as well. Neither full
SFF
flight simulator sessions nor a Type Rating check are mandatory in this case.
Single Fleet Flying One pool of pilots flying multiple Airbus models under a single licence endorsement is
referred to as Single Fleet Flying (SFF). SFF is both practical and cost effective since:
One pool of pilots flying related
aircraft under a single licence • Take-offs and landings in one model count towards recency of experience
endorsement. on all when it comes to satisfying the regulatory requirement of at least three
take-offs and landings at the controls over a 90-day period
• Recurrent training, proficiency checks and line checks in one model are valid for all
85#TSAF
60
25 years of flight operational commonality
Flight operational commonality due to a consistent man-machine interface across types
Electronic Centralised
Aircraft Monitoring
(ECAM)
Fly-by-wire
Flight control computers
Surface
deflection
Surface
Pilot Control Aircraft
deflection
order laws response
order
Feedback
CCQ Cross Crew Qualification and Mixed Fleet Flying
Flight operational commonality between Airbus aircraft having separate Type Certifi-
Cross Crew Qualification cates and requiring separate Type Ratings varies from 40% for the A320-A380 to 90%
Shortened instead for the A330-A340 combination, measured as a reduction in pilot transition training
of full transition training to days relative to a standard Type Rating course duration.
acquire an aircraft Type Rating.
The remaining transition training from one Airbus type to another is known as Cross
Crew Qualification (CCQ). It consists of a reduced ground phase and a limited number
MFF of full flight simulator sessions (handling phase) followed by a Type Rating check. An
A320 pilot needs five simulator sessions to qualify on the A380, for instance, whereas
Mixed Fleet Flying pilots without previous Airbus fly-by-wire experience typically have nine sessions.
One pool of pilots flying related CCQ may lead to Mixed Fleet Flying (MFF). Airbus defines MFF as the operation of
aircraft that require separate multiple aircraft types – requiring separate licence endorsements – with a pool of
licence endorsements. multi-qualified pilots. MFF with Airbus aircraft is also practical and cost effective since:
• Take-offs and landings in one type count towards recency of experience on other
types, provided that one take-off and landing is performed in each type every 45
days (the A330-A340 combination does even better => only one take-off and
landing in one and two in the other every 90 days)
• Recurrent training, proficiency checks and line checks may alternate between types
85#TSAF
70
25 years of flight operational commonality
Flight operational commonality due to a consistent man-machine interface across types
The length of Airbus Type Rating courses
Flight Crew Licensing (FCL) compliant training and exam days
(base training not included)
Days
25
MORE time for revenue flying
REDUCED training cost
20
40 to 90% time saving
15
with Cross Crew Qualification
10
5
0
Full A320 or A330 A320 or A340 A320 to A330 A380 to A350 A330 to A340 A340 to A330
Transition or A340 to A350 or A340
Training* to A380 & vice versa
* 23 days for A350, 25 days for A380
All courses include full flight simulator sessions and a Type Rating check
85#TSAF
80
25 years of flight operational commonality
CTR Common Type Rating and Single Fleet Flying
The A330 and A350 have separate Type Certificates, but their handling characteristics
Common are so similar that they have been granted a Common Type Rating (FAA designation)
Type Rating or single licence endorsement (EASA terminology).
A single licence Nevertheless, pilots qualified on the A330 need differences training for the A350,
endorsement for essentially because of the increased functionality and interactivity that the A350
related aircraft having cockpit offers. It involves four days of laptop based systems knowledge acquisition
separate Type and procedures training plus four sessions in a non-moving Flight Training Device
Certificates. (EASA Level 2, FAA Level 6). Expensive full flight simulator sessions are not mandatory
and neither is a full Type Rating check. That is why flight operational commonality
between the A330 and A350 is expressed both in terms of pilot training days reduction
(65%) and tuition savings (80%), relative to a standard A350 Type Rating course.
The A330 and A350 may be operated by one pool of pilots under a single licence
endorsement (SFF) with the following credits:
• Take-offs and landings performed in any A330 or A350 count
towards recency of experience on both
• Line and proficiency checks in any A330 or A350 are valid for both,
provided that differences have been addressed in recurrent training
An integrated family
of aircraft
5 aircraft types with synergies
in flight training and flight operations
85#TSAF
90
25 years of flight operational commonality
Regulatory aspects
A350 flight training
Pilots qualified on one Airbus (a ‘base’ aircraft) can be trained on another Airbus
device for differences
(the ‘candidate’ aircraft) based on system and manoeuvre comparisons presented in
training Operator Difference Requirement (ODR) tables. Differences for each aircraft combination
are listed and graded from A to E level according to their severity, which determines
the corresponding training and checking needs. Airbus ODR tables are available upon
request.
Regulations and recommendations with regard to the use of ODR based training
programmes, such as CCQ courses, and the implementation of SFF and MFF can
be found in Operational Suitability Data (OSD) documents published by Airbus and
approved by EASA. Since the introduction of a new rule in Part 21 pertaining to OSD,
EASA no longer publishes operational evaluation results as Operations Evaluation
Board reports. Existing reports disappeared from the EASA website at the
end of 2015; from that date those with an Airbus content are managed by Airbus
and released to operators on an ad hoc basis, as is the case for approved OSD
documents today.
The FAA equivalent of Operations Evaluation Board reports and now OSD documents
is the Flight Standardization Board (FSB) report. FSB reports continue to be published
on the FSIMS website of the FAA.
A330 to A350 training may be
done with an FTD2* instead
A pilot’s perspective on flight operational commonality
of a full flight simulator, which
reduces the training media The skills and experience accumulated in one Airbus aircraft can be carried over
investment significantly. to another one, which enhances proficiency. Pilots benefit from greater mobility too:
an airline looking for, say, A330 qualified pilots may also invite A320 pilots to apply,
Equipped with full size cockpit panels
since the cost of A320 to A330 CCQ is relatively low.
and all controls, switches and knobs
that physically replicate the aircraft. Those who practise SFF and/or MFF gain access to a larger part of the network, so
their work environment is more varied. This could mean alternating long haul with short
* Non-moving Flight Training Device
haul trips, which provides more take-off and landing opportunities and may lead to a
(EASA Level 2, FAA Level 6)
better balance between work and private life compared with purely long haul flying.
Complacency is less likely and motivation tends to improve as well.
85#TSAF
01
25 years of flight operational commonality
The value of flight
operational commonality
Generally, airline pilots get to fly various aircraft models and/or types Recent developments
during their professional life, because of:
The integration of the A350 into the
• Career incentives that make them move to bigger equipment Airbus family of fly-by-wire aircraft is a
and change from the right- to the left-hand seat fine example of Airbus’ ability to combine
innovation with commonality. Following
• Aircraft replacement initiated by their employer
regulatory approval of a Common Type
• A change of employer Rating for the A330 and A350 as well as
CCQ from the A320 Family in 2014,
• A combination of the above
A340 to A350 and A380 to A350 CCQ
It is not uncommon for a pilot to experience six to eight equipment changes courses are now available too.
in total at a typical retraining cost of US$30,000 per event in 2016 economic Flight operational commonality between
conditions. Add around one-and-a-half months of downtime for each change the A350 and A380 in particular is an
and it becomes obvious that this is costing the airlines collectively several impressive 80%, resulting in a CCQ
billions of dollars every year. Those with an Airbus fleet, however, can reduce duration of only five days and a recency
pilot retraining cost by two-thirds on average when using ODR based training of experience requirement in MFF
programmes. operations equal to that of the
In addition to that, airlines can take advantage of SFF and MFF in many ways: A330-A340 combination.
• From creating an integrated fleet management structure As for the A320neo, EASA and the FAA
and multi-qualifying their flight instructors/examiners… have concluded that the installation of
PW1100G-JM or CFM LEAP-1A engines
• To using single-aisle first officers as augmentation pilots
does not really change the handling
on long-range widebody aircraft or even multi-qualifying
characteristics in comparison with the
reserve crews and ordinary line pilots at large
CFM56 or V2500 powered A320ceo.
SFF and MFF offer rostering flexibility, which results in greater pilot productivity. Henceforth, the A320neo can be
Smaller airlines benefit from powerful economies of scale that were the considered a variant of the A320ceo
privilege of big operators before. Depending on the mix of fleet and the nature under a single pilot licence endorsement
of an airline’s flight operations, annual revenue flying time per pilot may (Same Type Rating) designated ‘A320’.
increase by 5 to 15% with SFF and MFF.
Airbus flight operational commonality has been demonstrated to save up to
US$8 million per aircraft in present value terms over a 15-year period.
Greater pilot productivity due to flight operational commonality
Crews
per A350 stand-alone
Economies
aircraft A330 stand-alone
of scale
and less time
With A330-A350 SFF*
in training
SFF & MFF effect
Typically
5-15%
CCQ effect more revenue
flying time
per pilot
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Fleet size
Steady state relationship observed at various airlines
* In combination with CCQ from the A320 for instance
85#TSAF
11
25 years of flight operational commonality
Large-scale CCQ and MFF are unique to Airbus and much appreciated by its customers:
‘
One of the attractions Operating both A320 Family Our airline has employed CCQ is really a plus
of going for MFF was the and A330 aircraft does CCQ/MFF for a number and training is facilitated
advantages it would bring not create any operational of years now, which has by the Airbus approach
in terms of mixing long difficulties for our pilots but turned out to be effective Brussels Airlines
and short haul flying and only benefits with regard and successful. We took
MFF is very beneficial for
this has been very popular to crew planning and saving full advantage of the strong
mid-size companies like ours.
with our pilots in terms resources functional commonality
We would like to congratulate
of maintaining recency Windrose Airlines established by ODR tables
Airbus on this
and competency and Operations Evaluation ’
Cathay Pacific Airways The MFF is most useful Board reports Onur Air
for flexibility Gulf Air
Thomas Cook Airlines
CCQ is a reality
at more than 60 operators,
35 of which have
also implemented MFF.
Be one of them!
CONCLUSION
All Airbus fly-by-wire airliners have been designed with flight operational commonality in mind,
which has resulted in exceptional handling and procedures similarity between even the smallest
and the biggest of those aircraft.
Over the past 25 years, numerous operators around the world have discovered the benefits of this:
optimised flight training and unprecedented crew rostering flexibility coupled with enhanced pilot
proficiency and motivation.
Airbus remains strongly committed to offering this valuable feature to its customers, as demonstrated
by the successful integration of the A350 and A320neo into the Airbus product line.
85#TSAF
21
Flight recorders
data inspection
by Airbus
The flight recorders or “black boxes” might be the most
famous avionics units in an aircraft. They do not make an
aircraft fly; they do not participate to passenger comfort.
However, black boxes are well known by the public
because they contain something precious: flight data.
Whenever an aircraft accident occurs, an investigation is
launched to determine its root causes. For that, investi- Article by (left to right)
gators need lots of flight data. The more accurate the Raphaëlle OMON
Indicating, Recorders
data, the more precise the investigation results will be
& Lighting Systems Engineer
and the more benefits will be derived for aviation safety. AIRBUS
raphaelle.omon@airbus.com
This is why black boxes draw so much attention. This is
Thomas QUILLIOU
also why it is so important to continuously ensure that
Product Leader Recorders,
flight recorders’ data quality is high at all times. Cockpit Clock & Lighting Systems
AIRBUS
thomas.t.quilliou@airbus.com
85#TSAF
31
Flight recorders data inspection by Airbus
Two flight recorders are installed on each Airbus aircraft:
• The Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR): with a capacity of 30 minutes to 120 minutes of
audio data. The CVR records the entire cockpit audio environment on four channels.
Three channels are dedicated to the crew members (captain, first officer, third
occupant seat) and one channel is dedicated to the Cockpit Ambient Microphone
(CAM).
• The Digital Flight Data Recorder (DFDR): with a capacity of 25 hours of continuous
recording. The DFDR records up to 88 parameters as required by international
regulations. Each of these 88 parameters represents tens of different signals.
Regulation changes requiring periodic data inspection
The regulation authorities, especially the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO), the European Commission through the European Aviation Safety Agency
(EASA), and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) have adopted regulations
whereby the flight recorders’ data must be inspected at intervals.
Several national aviation authorities have expressed similar requirements in their
aircraft operating rules. These requirements usually apply even on flight recorders
continuously monitored by On-board Maintenance Systems.
The requirements consist in checking:
• For the CVR: the correct duration of the recordings and the quality of audio data
• For the DFDR: the correct duration of the recording and the reasonableness of
recorded parameters
The inspection of flight recorders may require a significant number of engineering
hours, in order to:
• Correctly transform the raw data into engineering units
• Analyse the behaviour of each parameter, by comparison with the flight context
• Produce an inspection report
• Define and document procedures in use
85#TSAF
41
Flight recorders data inspection by Airbus
New economical flight recorders
data inspection by Airbus
Every year Airbus performs hundreds of flight recorder readouts, either for certification
or for aircraft incident analysis purpose. Airbus assets comprise facilities, ground
support equipment, proprietary software, and above all: skilled, trained personnel.
Airbus data inspection services include:
• The CVR audio inspection service where an audio inspection report is provided.
This service is now proposed in the e-catalogue
• The DFDR data inspection, provided as technical assistance
Since 2016 Airbus offers quick and economic data inspection. Data is transferred
to Airbus using a secured File Transfer System (FTP): there is no need to ship
the unit to Airbus.
Usual data inspection Data inspection service by Airbus
Airline Repair shop Airline Airbus
Shipment Secured
of unit File Transfer System
to shop (FTS)
Data
extraction
Unit removal Data Expert
+ replacement Data download data
with another inspection on-wing examination
unit
Unit
recertification
Return shipment Compliant
of unit to airline inspection report
Airbus provides turnkey solutions characterised by concise, compliant reports.
CVR audio DFDR data
inspection inspection
The inspection of CVR audio has The inspection of DFDR data must determine the serviceability
to be done at intervals of 3 months of each mandatory parameter recorded by the DFDR.
to 2 years.
This check requires a precise knowledge of the aircraft config-
The expected quality of a CVR uration and of the aircraft systems.
audio recording depends on
For example: let’s consider a parameter remaining invalid during
different factors such as:
an entire flight. This may be a normal situation:
• The type of aircraft
• The parameter may correspond to a function not exercised
• The technology of the CVR during this flight
and its peripherals
• The parameter may be available only with certain options
• The channel being analysed installed on the aircraft
The CVR audio inspection The DFDR data inspection by Airbus crosschecks the recorded
must therefore be performed data with aircraft configuration data, and engineering judgement,
by experienced and trained to produce a turnkey report (no additional engineering hours
personnel. to be spent to analyse the report).
85#TSAF
51
Flight recorders data inspection by Airbus
Advantages of flight recorders data inspection by Airbus
• Turnkey solution: by using Airbus services, an airline minimises the number
of engineering hours required for an inspection
• File Transfer Service: no unit shipment is needed; this reduces the number of unit
removals, and all ancillary costs (spare installation, shipment, and recertification)
• Advice: in case any issue is found on a flight recorder, Airbus provides precise
troubleshooting advice and follow-up to ensure the recorder serviceability
• Expertise: flight recorders data is analysed by expert personnel, who are
experienced in analysing data
For more information and prices concerning flight recorder data inspection by Airbus,
please contact Airbus customer support through Tech request in ATA 2371 or 3133.
CONCLUSION
Airbus flight recorder inspection services offer a new turnkey solution for airlines. These services are
proposed to allow airlines to benefit from Airbus’ experience in the area of flight recorders. By selecting
Airbus services, an airline minimises the number of engineering hours spent on inspection tasks, and can
focus on their flight and maintenance operations.
85#TSAF
61
Airbus Corporate Jets
VIP Kit solutions
to optimise A330
and A340 aircraft
Airbus commercial aircraft cabins are carefully configured
to correspond with an airline’s most efficient, revenue
generating operations.
Responding to the needs of operators with requirements
that extend beyond the scope of usual airline full passenger
seat arrangements, Airbus has its own division dedicated
Article by
to equipping its aircraft with highly customised VIP cabins.
Lai-ling FUNG
Cabin Engineering Project Manager In order to offer airlines additional flexibility and opportunities
AIRBUS
for creative, optimised use of their aircraft, Airbus Corporate
lai-ling.fung@airbus.com
Jets (ACJ) now offers a VIP Kit solution for A330 and A340
aircraft.
This VIP Kit transforms the central part of a standard full
passenger seating cabin into a luxurious corporate jet
compartment.
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
85#TSAF
71
New cabin products
In this very competitive market, airlines are obliged to develop strategies to capture
the maximum of business. A key factor differentiating the services of one airline to
another is the level of comfort and amount of amenities aboard the aircraft.
In addition to the operation of an Airbus fleet composed of the most modern aircraft
in the world, airlines are continuously updating their cabins to provide maximum
comfort and value-for-money for their passengers.
Airlines also benefit from the economic advantages that refurbished cabins bring:
weight saving, increased technological reliability, reduced maintenance costs and
good levels of product support, warranty and spares availability from the suppliers
of the innovative systems and furnishings.
Cabin renewal gives the airline a chance to keep up with industry trends and to adapt
to route changes and company strategy. Attractive, comfortable and modern cabins
enable airlines to compete for increasingly discerning passengers.
Seat suppliers are responding to this continuous cabin upgrade trend by producing
new style hi-tech and ergonomic products. The old style reclining seats are being
replaced with horizontal full-flat beds enclosed in private cocoons and packed with
the latest IFE. Today’s premium economy class rivals many of yesterday’s business
classes, and today’s business class is more luxurious than yesterday’s first class.
However equipping a cabin with the most up-to-date and comfortable seats is no
longer enough – some airlines are going even further by offering passengers their own
individual compartments in the form of mini-suites while others offer ultra-high-end
amenities such as bars, relaxation lounges, showers and entire private apartments
in the skies.
The appearance of corporate jet style luxury inside a commercial airline cabin is making
the headlines with Hollywood A-list personalities seen travelling in style in the TV
commercials for some Airbus operators. Not only is such exposure providing a lot
of publicity for the airline, but passengers are prepared to pay premium fares for
the privilege of VVIP travelling.
85#TSAF
81
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
ACJ VIP Kits
85#TSAF
91
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
Combining luxury and flexibility
While airline ultra-first class arrangements are a fixed and permanently installed feature
on an aircraft and will fly regardless if booked or not, ACJ introduces a new concept
of temporarily installed quick-change VIP amenities into a standard cabin by retrofit.
This concept referred to as a ‘VIP Kit’ opens up a world of possibilities to airlines
seeking to optimise their operations by using the same aircraft for a multitude of
missions and to target a full range of passenger profiles according to demand, season,
special events and specific company strategy.
The ACJ VIP Kit is a set of modular furnishings (seats, beds, tables, divans, partitions…)
that can be retrofitted into the standard airline cabin with minimum impact to the
surrounding monuments, lining and systems. The majority of the furnishings are
designed to lock into the existing standard seat rails. All that is needed to transform the
cabin is to remove the seats within the zone to be converted and slot the specially
designed kit into place. CIDS and IFE re-configurations depend on the pre-mod status
of the cabin but are generally limited to simple software reprogramming uploaded from
a memory stick.
CIDS Cabin Intercommunication Data System
IFE In Flight Entertainment
85#TSAF
02
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
Example of ACJ340 Conference room
Protocol/Security area Example of ACJ340 Office
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
85#TSAF
12
ACJ VIP Kits are designed to be a plug and play solution
Depending on the configuration of the kit which is individually designed for each
customer, cabin conversion can take between 8 hours for two tables and 8
armchairs on an A320 to a few days for a full section of A330 VIP corporate jet
furnishings including bedroom, lounge and office.
An ACJ VIP Kit will enable the operator to respond quickly to fluctuations in passen-
ger demand, can help utilise the same aircraft on different routes, can be a powerful
promotional feature and overall will provide the flexibility to optimise flight operations.
Airbus is the first to offer “two-for-one” high comfort commercial cabin quick-change
configurations.
The process of custom definition, manufacture and entry-into-service of an ACJ VIP
kit follows a similar pattern to that of the original cabin but at a reduced scale, to a
Airbus
quicker timeframe and with a greater degree of design flexibility. As ACJ is part of
Airbus, ACJ guarantees full certification and airworthiness compliance plus the usual
Corporate
high level of after-sales support our customers expect for their fleets.
Jets
When it comes to corporate jet ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit
style luxury, Airbus has its own
Flying to new heights in aircraft dual utilisation
division dedicated to equipping its
aircraft with the finest VIP cabins. Further to providing the possibility to install a section of quick-change ultra-first
ACJ is unique amongst commercial class furnishings into a commercial aircraft, an ACJ VIP Kit can also completely
aircraft manufacturers in providing transform the entire aircraft for very special missions.
a complete range of services from
In line with the “two-for-one” concept, an ACJ VIP Kit may be particularly attractive
marketing, sales, cabin installation,
to governmental customers wishing to utilise a long range aircraft from their
entry-into-service and after-sales
national carrier for worldwide summit meetings and intercontinental state visits.
support, maintenance and cabin
The utilisation of the same A330/A340 aircraft for commercial revenue flights plus
rebuild for very specific aircraft
for private state use makes good economic sense. When not used by the ministry,
interior configurations.
the aircraft is flying with the country’s airline.
ACJ’s capability ranges from the Another clever application of an ACJ VIP Kit can be for charter operators of Airbus
full furnishing of an A340-600 VVIP A330 and A340 aircraft seeking to broaden the scope of the services they offer
aircraft for a private individual, to by proposing different cabins on the same aircraft according to customer needs.
highly appointed A318 aircraft
The generous cabin space of at least 216m2 on an A330 and A340 can easily
destined for luxury business jet
accommodate a full ACJ VIP Kit comprising several private rooms. Sufficient
charter operations. The division
passenger seating in business class and economy class level is maintained in the
has built A320 cabins for efficient
aircraft for entourage, journalists and associated staff for a total passenger count
governmental transport and A319s
of about 200.
have been equipped as comfortable
company shuttles. In order to provide the quickest solution to transform an all-passenger aircraft into
a corporate jet, ACJ has taken the initiative to pre-engineer a VIP kit that can be
installed into a part of the constant section of any in-service A330 and A340 aircraft.
Based on its extensive experience of VIP jet furnishing this specific ACJ A330/
A340 VIP Kit offers a comprehensive layout arrangement over almost 60m2
comprising a generously sized and luxuriously finished executive seating area
(14m2), conference/dining room (22m2), private office (9m2) and a bedroom (13m2).
High-end local IFE (video screens and Blu-ray players) is also included in the kit
that fits perfectly into existing linings under the overhead stowage compartments.
The seats and divan are all certified to 16G requirements and are qualified for
occupation during Taxi, Take-Off and Landing. A total of 19 passengers can be
accommodated in the ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit.
Each of the individual seats is located adjacent to a separate full size table for
comfortable working and spacious dining. The executive seating, in particular,
is located in its own zone and can be used for guests or for protocol and
entourage staff.
85#TSAF
22
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
Not only does the ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit offer luxurious seating but for night flights
the seating positions can be transformed into a total of 11 full length horizontal flat beds,
of which 3 are at least 1m x 2m size single beds of the best comfort in 2 separate
private rooms.
Working is facilitated by the spacious conference room that spans the entire 5.3m width
of the A330 and A340 cabin. Equipped with a 42” video screen, presentations can be
easily shared amongst the 12 participants. By laying beautiful linen on the working tables,
the conference room is transformed into an exclusive dining area.
A fully enclosed private office is also included, comprising a convertible 3-seater divan,
a convenient desk and an armchair. The 30” video screen mounted onto a pivoting arm
can be viewed from both the armchair and the divan, enabling the office to be also used
as a cinema lounge.
Finally, the ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit offers the privilege of having a fully separate calm
and quiet bedroom in the cabin. This room features 2 full size 1m x 2m single beds,
each equipped with its own IFE screen and stowage console in addition to the existing
overhead compartments.
As a majority of the ACJ A330/A340 Kit components are already produced, the lead time
to design and manufacture a section of VIP cabin on an A330 or A340 is an impressive
50% less than compared to a 20-month standard lead time for a comparable product.
Example of
ACJ340 Office
85#TSAF
32
VIP Kit solutions to optimise A330 and A340 aircraft
Example of
ACJ319 Club 2 and divan
with consoles Finalisation of the ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit to the pre-defined configuration and trim
and finish is expected to take only 10 months. However, adaptation and fine-tuning
to the precise pre-mod status of the customer aircraft may need additional lead time.
Customer special requests and additional customisation will also impact lead time,
to be studied on a case by case basis.
ACJ is here to guide operators through each step of the customisation process
and ACJ’s highly specialised engineers and designers are ready to respond to the
customers’ every need.
Once the ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit is finalised and a small amount of aircraft provisions
installed (some load-bearing hardpoints and power connection sockets only), it takes
about 4 days to convert the airliner cabin into a VIP jet. Another 3 days is all it takes
to restore the cabin back to its former standard configuration.
All ACJ VIP Kit parts are designed with appropriate split lines to fit through the cabin
doors. As a bonus, the ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit components can also be packed and
stowed in the cargo hold in special boxes (included) for transportation to an outstation
if needed. This gives operators the added freedom to convert the dedicated aircraft in
Cabin design and illustrations a qualified maintenance centre wherever it may be in the world, without any need to fly
courtesy of Plus 33 Design Studio back to the home base.
CONCLUSION
ACJ enables operators to enhance their cabins with luxurious furnishings and also with ACJ VIP Kits
for quick cabin conversion in the race for best comfort and optimisation of aircraft usage.
The ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit solution presents a unique opportunity to easily and temporarily upgrade
the full A330 and A340 passenger cabin into a corporate jet in less than a week to use the aircraft
for special missions.
There is currently one pre-engineered ACJ A330/A340 VIP Kit immediately available on the market.
This is an exceptional chance to benefit from the expertise of ACJ and be the first to secure
an innovative and powerful tool for ‘two-for-one’ operations of Airbus A330 and A340 aircraft.
For further information, contact the ACJ sales team:
Chadi SAADE, Email: chadi.saade@airbus.com, Tel: 00 33 (0)5 61 93 29 09
85#TSAF
42
O P T I M A
Optimisation of Performance by Task Interval Maintenance Assessment
The optimisation of maintenance programmes, together
with planning activities, play an important role for
aircraft performance; reducing Direct Maintenance
Costs (DMC) and enhancing aircraft availability.
This article gives a glimpse of the Airbus engineering
approach to implementing an optimisation of the
Article by (left to right) maintenance programme at the Maintenance Review
Oliver Weiss Board Report (MRBR) level as well as for operators’
Head of Maintenance
customised maintenance programmes.
Programmes Engineering
Systems
AIRBUS The Optimisation of Performance by Task Interval Maintenance Assessment (OPTIMA)
oliver.weiss@airbus.com is not an Airbus tool but a process developed by Airbus and accepted by EASA, FAA
and Transport Canada with the objective to optimise maintenance requirements
Luis Calderon (including tasks, procedures and task intervals) from the maintenance programme
Business Developer, without compromising safety and ensuring reliable and cost-effective aircraft operations.
Maintenance Programmes
The maintenance programme optimisation with the OPTIMA process monitors the
Engineering
maintenance programme’s efficiency throughout a cycle that involves three major
AIRBUS
interlaced cornerstones: Optimisation assessment, In-service data, and Optimisation
luis.calderon@airbus.com
implementation.
Paul Bruzzone
Manager, A330 Fleet Optimisation
Engineering Management
assessment
QANTAS Engineering
In-service Optimisation
data implementation
85#TSAF
52
OPTIMA
Optimisation of Performance by Task Interval Maintenance Assessment The OPTIMA process consists of a series of steps to ensure the best results:
• Capturing and processing relevant aircraft in-service data
• Analysing the failure effects and related faults on the aircraft systems and operations
• Assessing the consequences of a functional defect occurring during operations
• Using engineering judgement and statistical methods on the data to estimate how
long operations can continue with hidden defects
• Effectively implementing the assessment results in the maintenance programme
• Measuring the efficiency of the optimisation by analysing the data after implementing
the changes in the MRBR or in the operators maintenance programme
The OPTIMA process can be applied to MRBR evolutions or for the optimisation of
operators’ customised maintenance programmes. For the optimisation of the MRBR,
the quality of the data is just as relevant as the quantity.
Only fully reported maintenance tasks represent the “data sample”. This data sample
reaches a 95% confidence level, only once reasonable levels of data quality and
quantity are met. Airbus introduced a statistical mathematical model in order to take
full benefit of the reported scheduled maintenance in-service data.
The principle is to estimate the whole Fleet Finding Rate “F” and the associated
Margin of Error “ME”, with a confidence level of 95%, using iterative algorithms and
integrating a method that will attribute a weight to each report depending on the task
accomplishment interval. Even in the case of customised optimisation for a specific
operator where all the relevant data of the operators’ fleet is available (the data
sample will therefore be equal to the fleet), the Fleet Finding Rate will be computed to
give weight to each report depending on the task accomplishment interval.
Task
Report at 50% Report at 90% accomplished
of MRBR interval of MRBR interval at 50% Task
of MRBR accomplished
interval at 90%
of MRBR
interval
Previous task MRBR F +/- ME
accomplishment interval
Unscheduled maintenance and replacement data either related to a specific mainte-
nance requirement or that could later trigger new requirements is a key element of the
in-service data collected. Not only are the operational interruptions considered in the
analysis but also any minor finding or unscheduled event recorded by the flight crew,
cabin crew and/or maintenance crew during the aircraft operation.
Data sample reports and new shop reports are included in the collection of in-service
data for those tasks where no Non-Routine Card (NRC) findings from scheduled events
are expected (e.g. Discard tasks, Lubrication tasks, etc.).
Economic data for scheduled and unscheduled events are also part of the in-service
data required for the optimisation. These are considered as part of the economic
assessment of the effectiveness of maintenance requirements. Economic data is
excluded for the optimisation of safety-related maintenance tasks.
85#TSAF
62
OPTIMA
Figure 3
Scheduled Component Operational Unscheduled Economic Sample
maintenance reliability reliability maintenance data & shop
data data data data reports data
Operator Additional data
specific data Operational collection has
uploaded into Interruptions Operators’ been launched
Data delivered Line and Base
Airbus’ chargeable to specific to support
to Airbus Non-Routine
database the aircraft data; Aircraft
in industry Cards
(delays, e.g. Maintenance
standards and TechLog
cancellation, man hours, System
and uploaded entries
deviation, Operational optimisation
into Airbus’ systematically
Airbus in flight Interruption (servicing,
database recorded
fleet turn back, costs lubrication,
data etc.) restoration,
discard tasks)
Data is uploaded to Airbus’ database in order to optimise maintenance programming
and allow the final data to conform with e-Business SPEC2000. Airbus is then able
to manage different data formats and upload them for the operator into the Airbus
“In-service Data On-Line Services” IDOLS. (Figure 3)
The quality of the final data is ensured through OPTIMA engineering data validation.
The data packages are scrutinised to determine a correlation with the impacted
maintenance requirement and/or determine potential new requirements.
OPTIMA assesses the data and recommends task intervals, task procedure
and/or task adaptation
The OPTIMA assessment makes full use of Airbus’ specialist “engineering judgement”
and a “risk analysis” on the relevant validated data. The OPTIMA process focuses not
only on the analysis of scheduled maintenance data but it also gives the same relevance
to all in-service data, Airbus’ worldwide fleet experience and Airbus’ first-hand design
knowledge (Figure 4). This, together with the further development of statistical formulas,
is a significant complementary step to the general approach maintained throughout
the years by the industry and regulatory entities for optimisation exercises.
Scheduled Unscheduled
Unscheduled
removals maintenance removals
Scheduled
maintenance
Direct
Direct Operational
Maintenance Maintenance
Operational Costs interruptions
Costs
interruptions
Figure 4: OPTIMA gives the same relevance to all in-service data,
Airbus’ worldwide fleet experience and Airbus’ first-hand design knowledge
85#TSAF
72
OPTIMA
Task Reports Economic Information
Nb. A/C
Nb. Of Operators
Total Reports
Findings Finding Rate & ME
Task Reports by Actual Interval FH
Climatic Areas
Task Reports by Age
Operational Interruptions
Operational Interruptions per year
tnuoC
.R.T
tnuoC
.R.T
tnuoC
.I.O
etaR
.F
etaR
.F
Total valid Reports Findings Finding Rate
Cost/A/C/Year ($) 12
100.00%
0.00%
)$(
raeY/C/A/tsoC
Scheduled
Unscheduled
Sched. Maint. Cost
.I.S.R
The assessment’s objective is to determine the most optimised interval for a specific
maintenance requirement. This optimised interval should be understood as a value
within a “corridor” where the higher limit (maximum risk) will represent an increased
probability of an unscheduled maintenance event taking place and the lower limit
(minimum risk) will represent the first opportunity for preventive maintenance.
The results of the data assessment and the computed values from the mathematical
model/formula are represented in a dashboard (Figure 5).
Figure 5: Dashboard
406
14 200 100%
150 80%
709 100 60%
0 50 4 2 0 0 % % 0 0
Fin
F
d
le
in
e
g
t F
R
R
ate 0
0
,
,
4
4
0
0
%
%
<0 o
(en.. 0-749 750-1499 1500-2249 2250-2999 3000-3749 3750-4499 4500-5249 5250-5999 6000-6749 6750-7499 7500-974
9
9 750-11999
ME 0,40% Unsched. Maint. Cost
Boreal/Polar X 400 100% 14
Desert 300 80%
Sub-Tropical X 200 60% 12
Temperate X 40%
100
Tropical X 20%
0 0 10
0-4 4-8 8-12 10-16 16-40
8
IF TurnBack Diversion Cancellations Delays R.S.I.
Total 0 1 10
6
Delays 0 0,8 8
Av. Delay (min) 0 0,6 6
Cancellations 0 0,4 4 4
IFTB 0 0,2 2
Diversions 0 0 0 2
RSI 0
2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
0
This dashboard consolidates all the relevant data and is the backbone of the
assessment for Airbus specialists when performing the engineering analysis.
Once the optimised maintenance requirement (e.g. new/deleted tasks, improved
task intervals, modified task procedures) has been established, the planning of the
task accomplishment can be scheduled for the aircraft fleet.
Depending on the operators’ resources (labour, infrastructure, etc.), operation needs
(turn around times, uses), fleet conditions and priorities, the OPTIMA process can be
performed in two “directions”. The first where the selection of maintenance require-
ments to be optimised from the maintenance programme is set up to fit the existing
fleet maintenance planning (e.g. optimising out of phase tasks only) and the second
where an optimisation of the maintenance programme is set up in a new planning.
OPTIMA
85#TSAF
82
26.00%
24.00%
22.00%
20.00%
18.00%
16.00%
14.00%
12.00%
10.00%
8.00%
6.00%
4.00%
2.00%
0.00%
This allows Airbus to zoom into the in-service data and grasp more optimisation
opportunities to reduce DMC and enhance aircraft availability. Altogether, this provides
a chance for customised maintenance programme solutions.
etaR
gnidniF
26.32%
23.53%
21.05%
20.00%
MPD Task References
14.35% 50xxxx-00001-01
50yyyy-00001-01
50zzzz-00001-01
11.11% 78xxxx-00001-01
8.79% 78yyyy-00001-01
8.68%
6.86%
6.38% 7.06%
3.85%
2.55% 2.80%
0.43%
C1: 0-3 Y C2: 3-6 Y C3: 6-9 Y
Aircraft age category (years)
Finding Rate per ATA2D and Region
ATA2D
noigeR
The OPTIMA process has been applied not only in MRBR recent evolutions (A320
evolution during 2014-2017 and currently A380 MRBR evolution) but it has been
implemented as well by operators on their A330 and A380 programmes with full
involvement of their local airworthiness authorities. (See FAST magazine #55)
Airbus maintenance engineering is continuously working with IT specialists and data
scientists to improve the assessment methodology. To do so, Airbus focuses on
defining more accurate performance standards to measure the effectiveness of the
maintenance programme for the worldwide fleet or for sub-fleets with specific
characteristics like aircraft age or environmental conditions (figure 6 & 7).
Figure 6
21 22 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 32 33 34 35 36 38 44 46 49 50 72 73 75 78 79 80 Colours
Min
Desert
Max
Sub-tropical
Temperate
Tropical
Figure 7
OPTIMA
CONCLUSION
The OPTIMA process by Airbus relies on a good balance between in-service data analysis, usage of statistical
methods and engineering judgement from Airbus’ long and extended engineering expertise. This efficient
process results in an optimised maintenance programme for the airlines, which in turn increases aircraft
availability for more revenue flights and reduces Direct Maintenance Costs (DMC).
85#TSAF
92
Qantas’ OPTIMA exercise
The benefits that OPTIMA can bring to an airline was confirmed
by Qantas who conducted an optimisation exercise on its A330 fleet
with the assistance of Airbus.
The data collected to enable the OPTIMA process was broken into 6 key elements:
• Scheduled maintenance • Unscheduled maintenance
• Component reliability • Operational reliability
• Economic information • Sample data
Qantas’ feedback was the following:
As the Qantas maintenance information system uses electronic certification,
all maintenance records for scheduled and unscheduled tasks are readily available
for analysis, eliminating the need for what was historically a time-consuming process
to gather paper records. This also enabled 100% of relevant data to be analysed
in the OPTIMA process and reduced the time to validate and load data into
the IDOLS system.
The process considered all relevant data in the analysis of maintenance task
performance. Formerly, in optimisation and evolution exercises, results have been
skewed to the analysis of scheduled maintenance findings. The OPTIMA process
balances the issues and considers the complete asset maintenance by using
many data aspects. This may lead to a different conclusion than when considering
only the findings of scheduled tasks.
The engineering judgement and risk assessment applied to the analysis for Qantas’
customised optimisation exercise allowed both the Airbus expertise (inclusive of the
reported world fleet experience) and the unique experience of the operator to be
considered in the analysis process. Through the engineering analysis of the data,
the results could be considered with respect to their significance on the affected
system and given context to the unique aircraft operation, modification status,
configuration, and age of the Qantas aircraft fleet and solutions tailored to suit.
The operations, planning, resourcing and processes of operators are not identical
and these differences are accounted for in a customised optimisation exercise
but cannot always be accounted for in the MRBR process.
The process was well defined from the start, and acceptance of it was obtained
from the regulator before commencing data collection and analysis. This ensured
that the process worked efficiently with very little rework being required as expectation
and understanding on both sides were clear. In all, the collaboration and quality
of dialogue between Qantas and Airbus was great.
SWITS
Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
85#TSAF
03
With their kilometres of cables, aircraft electrical system
checks can be a difficult challenge for airlines and MROs.
In order to ease the process of finding a fault and precisely
locating it, Airbus is offering a new tool: SWITS.
Using reflectometry* and the LCR measurement
(impedance, capacitance and resistance),
Article by (left to right) SWITS can detect a fault in a fraction of the usual time.
Jean-Luc BARRE Finding a fault on the aircraft’s electrical system
Electrical Installation Senior Engineer
Troubleshooting can become a complicated task when multiple lines (equipment)
AIRBUS
are suspected in the Post Flight Report (PFR). Considering that permanent
jean-luc.barre@airbus.com
or intermittent faults can appear anywhere in an electrical system, issues can take
a long time to locate and fix.
Nick FENDALL
GSE & Tools Business Development Manager On occasion, intermittent electrical faults that occur in flight can be almost
Maintenance Planning & GSE Services impossible to replicate on ground. These intermittent faults can be caused by very
AIRBUS small chafing, corrosion or contact faults that can be difficult to locate, resulting in
nick.fendall@airbus.com increased aircraft downtime and increased maintenance costs due to ad-hoc
computer and component replacements. Adding to the mechanic’s burden is the
fact that the cables are routed behind furniture, fittings or structure, so gaining
access to wiring can be a large part of the job when troubleshooting electrical faults.
For this reason the Airbus Ground Support Equipment, Support Engineering and
BizLab teams have been working closely with airlines in order to simplify the trouble-
shooting of permanent and intermittent faults found in aircraft electrical systems.
Customer satisfaction and reduction of aircraft downtime are at the heart of this
initiative and Airbus is now able to offer enhanced electrical system troubleshooting
tools and services using the latest technology.
SWITS - Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
85#TSAF
13
The SWITS tool (Smart Wiring Troubleshooting)
The SWITS tool is based on standard LCR measurement The end fittings are equipment connected at the extremity
technology in combination with healthy references of the of the computer such as proximity sensors, servo valves, etc.
aircraft’s electrical systems. In addition to LCR measurement, Failing this, it is necessary to perform an inspection of the full
the SWITS uses TDR (Time Domain Reflectometry) to determine wiring loom. Considering that the wiring loom can be more
the fault location. Together, this enables the tool to sequentially than 100 metres long and concealed by cabin fittings and
test the affected electrical system lines, compare the results to aircraft structure, this is no easy task. Also by having to replace
the database of healthy references and automatically identify what could be fully functioning computers or end fittings in
the nature and location of the fault. search of an issue can result in a high number of No Fault
Found (NFF) events, which add unnecessary costs.
In creating SWITS, Airbus has worked with tool supplier
NEXEYA to develop the WIDD 200 (Wire Defect Detection) tool By using the SWITS tool, the procedure for troubleshooting will
and combined it with aircraft electrical systems references to start by placing the SWITS tool in place of the computer thanks
perform automatic fault detection. This equipment is capable to the provided connection cable. The tool will then run an
of checking 62 channels sequentially which enables incredibly automated test of each line targeted in the GTR (Ground Test
fast fault analysis. Initially SWITS will be enabled to test ATA 27 Requirement) to easily identify the type of defect (end fitting
(flight controls) and ATA32 (landing gear) electrical systems issue or wiring issue). During this check, the SWITS tool
on the A320 Family, A330 and A340. The functionality will be compares the LCR and TDR measurements to the database
progressively expanded to all systems on all Airbus aircraft. of healthy references to identify the nature and location of the
defect. This will enable maintenance personnel to go directly
One of the tool’s main benefits remains the shift between the
to the fault, reducing the need for random component replace-
usual process and the radically simplified and faster SWITS
ments or removal of many cabin furnishings and linings in
process. The traditional procedure for troubleshooting often
search of the problem. If no fault is found by the SWITS tool,
involves first replacing the computer for the affected system.
the troubleshooting procedure will recommend replacing the
If this is not successful in resolving the problem, the second
computer as a last step. This will have the benefit of isolating
step is to check or replace the end fittings in search of the issue.
the problem to a wiring, end fitting or computer fault and
reduce the number of No Fault Found (NFF) events.
Main characteristics
• 62 channel LCR and reflectometry measurement
• Able to detect the following faults:
- Short circuit
- Open circuit
- Bonding
- Grounding
- Intermittent
• Intelligent automatic testing of ATA 27
and 32 electrical systems
- Applicable to A320, A330 and A340 families
- No training required
• Intermittent fault finding function
- Applicable to any aircraft
with use of specific connections
- Specific user training required.
• SWITS includes:
- WiDD 200 tool
- Integrated rugged laptop
- Connection cables
- GTR
* Reflectometry is a measurement technique used to
determine the characteristics of electrical lines by observing
reflected waveforms. The amplitude of the reflected signal
can be determined from the impedance of the discontinuity.
The distance to the reflecting impedance can also be
determined from the time that a pulse takes to return.
SWITS - Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
85#TSAF
23
Troubleshooting example in automatic mode
The following example is a clear demonstration of how the SWITS tool works and its efficiency
compared to the traditional process. In this example two failures are simulated at the connection
between ELAC2 (Elevator Aileron Computer) “2CE2” and the servo valve of the servo control
33CE4:
• an open circuit on the wire 2793-4526
• 33CE4 equipment failure
Following the A320 TSM (Trouble Shooting Manual) task 27-10-00-810-828-A recommendations,
the first step is to replace the ELAC2. The second step is to replace 33CE4 and finally a wiring
check is performed, which in this case is 62 metres long.
Note: Aircraft Wiring Manual (AWM) shows
the connection between ELAC2 and servo
control 33CE4 in this wiring the cables are
connected to some VC (connectors
interface) and one VP (pressure seal).
A A 2S 2S 2S
A
7J 12 B 12 B S 9 B S T B S T
57 83 4523 4524 4571
A A PF22 PF20 PG20 PG20 PG20
10A 11 R 11 R S 10 R S H R S H
8A CF22
3H 156
2E 27 R 27 R S 11 R S J R S J
59 84 4 PG 52 24 5 4 P 5 G 2 2 6 4 4 P 5 G 7 2 2 4
2F 28 B 28 B S 12 B S U B S U
23
A 27-93-08
2C R H
154 R R 29 R 29 R S 13 R S K R S K
2D PF26 B 2 Y 2 61 86 4 PG 52 24 7 4 P 5 G 2 2 8 4 4 P 5 G 7 2 3 4
G B 43 B 43 B S 14 B S L B S L
91-20-33 P 27-93-08 22VC A 1906VC A 4008VP4012VC A 4058VC A
1844VT 128 132 138 621 621 622
2CE2 ELAC-2 B2 4529-DK18 S V
27-93-02-
84VU SHELF 4038VN
128 STA920 675 33CE4 SERVO CTL
R AILERON OUTBD B
675
By using the SWITS tool in place of the ELAC2, operators will be able to automatically
check the aileron servo control, wiring and connections at the same time.
This will save a significant amount of time and enable the operator to focus directly
on the 33CE4 failure or wire breakage.
LCR measurement with the SWITS tool connected in ELAC2’s position
Status High Low R (mes) R (ref)
KO 2CE2-AD-2E Ground 822.005 kOhm [LL:447.000 Ohm Ref:490.000 Ohm UL:553.000 Ohm]
KO 2CE2-AD-2F Ground 822.842 kOhm [LL:447.000 Ohm Ref:490.000 Ohm UL:553.000 Ohm]
KO 2CE2-AD-2E 2CE2-AD-2F 974.646 kOhm [LL:447.000 Ohm Ref:490.000 Ohm UL:553.000 Ohm]
OK 2CE2-AD-1G Ground 419.196 Ohm [LL:415.618 Ohm Ref:437.493 Ohm UL:459.368 Ohm]
OK 2CE2-AD-1H Ground 418.429 Ohm [LL:414.425 Ohm Ref:436.237 Ohm UL:458.049 Ohm]
OK 2CE1-AD-1G 2CE2-AD-1H 422.579 Ohm [LL:405.339 Ohm Ref:426.673 Ohm UL:448.007 Ohm]
SWITS - Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
85#TSAF
33
The LCR result shows an open circuit in the line 2CE2 AD 2E/2F as the recorded resistance
in the first circle (822 kOhms) is much higher than the reference in the second circle (490 ohms).
However, from this result alone we cannot determine if it is the cable that is cut or if it is the
end fitting that is defective, resulting in an abnormal electrical load.
Looking now at the TDR result we can see that there is a large peak at 35 metres, in
comparison to the reference image (displayed in blue). By taking the LCR and TDR results
together we can conclude there is an open circuit (breakage) in the cable at 35 metres
(TDR signal after break is not relevant).
0
0 20 40 60
Distance
Looking at the second example of an end fitting (33CE4) failure, the LCR measurement
will produce the same readings as for the previous example.
However looking again at the TDR result, we can see that there is a difference in peak
at approximately 62 metres in comparison to the reference image (displayed in blue).
From these results we can conclude there is an end fitting failure, as the wiring’s full
length is 62 metres.
Normal troubleshooting Troubleshooting using SWITS
E Bay access E Bay access
Replace ELAC 2 Connect SWITS in place of ELAC 2
Access to Servo CTL panel
removal with a platform If no finding Replace ELAC2
Wiring Check Servo valve
Wiring Check cables
Result Result
)RWS(
oitaR
evaW
gnidnatS
0.2
2CE2-AD-2F
Breakage at 35 metres 2CE2-AD-2F-ref
0.15
End of line 62 metres
0.1
0.05
80 100
0
0 20 40 60
Distance
)RWS(
oitaR
evaW
gnidnatS
0
0 20 40 60
Distance
0.16
2CE2-AD-2F
0.14 2CE2-AD-2F-ref
0.12
0.1
0.08 Open circuit at 62 metres
0.06
0.04
0.02
80 100
)RWS(
oitaR
evaW
gnidnatS
0.2
2CE2-AD-2F
Breakage at 35 metres 2CE2-AD-2F-ref
0.15
End of line 62 metres
0.1
0.05
80 100
0
0 20 40 60
Distance
)RWS(
oitaR
evaW
gnidnatS
0.16
2CE2-AD-2F
0.14 2CE2-AD-2F-ref
0.12
0.1
0.08 Open circuit at 62 metres
0.06
0.04
0.02
80 100
SWITS - Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
The SWITS’ Expert mode
An additional function has been added to SWITS for the troubleshooting of difficult
or intermittent wiring issues.
This function continuously scans the wiring to be tested in reflectometry mode and is able to
detect faults that last as little as 1 millisecond. Therefore, for these intermittent faults the tool
scans the wiring while someone gently shakes the cables or connector. If the fault is
reproduced only once and for a fraction of a second, the tool will be able to identify which
line is effected and where the defect in located.
Intermittent faults are often triggered by very small wiring defects such as pin/socket
connection issues, corrosion, wire chafing or ground bonding not well connected.
These faults can also sometimes only occur during flight and cannot be replicated on
ground. Due to their small size, fault finding and resolution in these cases can be a very
difficult and long task. With SWITS however, these faults can be found and solved in a very
small amount of time.
This intermittent fault finding mode (Expert mode) is not possible via the automatic analyses
function based on the GTR used for ATA 27 and 32. Specific user training is required to
be able to correctly configure the aircraft before starting the test, in order to avoid damage
to the electrical system, and to be able to correctly interpret the results. This mode has
the benefit of being able to be used on any aircraft or any electrical system once correctly
configured by the user. In practice, the intermittent fault finding mode will be used after
standard TSM tasks have been accomplished and the fault has been identified as an
intermittent fault.
The aim of this function is to connect the SWITS tool at one extremity thanks to the provided
connection cable, usually by removing the computer, and disconnecting all other end fittings
such as proximity sensors. This ensures only the wiring and connectors are connected
and analysed. As all end fittings are disconnected, the test is similar to a continuity test.
85#TSAF
43
Locates very small
intermittent
in-flight wiring
defects that are
difficult to replicate
on ground
85#TSAF
53
SWITS - Smart Wiring Troubleshooting
Onsite troubleshooting service by Airbus
Airbus Customer Services also proposes the possibility for onsite troubleshooting support
for electrical system faults related to wiring issues with a Customer support expert team
using the SWITS tool.
The team is trained to use SWITS and is qualified light Part 145, meaning that they are able
to disconnect and reconnect electrical items in order to perform the test using SWITS.
As has been proven with a number of customers, the experts are able to define and locate
the defect very quickly thanks to the use of SWITS and provide the repair solution.
To benefit from this service, a request can be raised in TechRequest.
CONCLUSION
By incorporating the latest technology, Airbus is now able to offer a tool and on-site service for fast
fault finding and troubleshooting of on-board electrical systems.
The SWITS tool will be available from November 2016 and the Airbus support engineering team
is currently offering a troubleshooting service which has proven to be very successful at quickly
resolving long running issues.
SWITS will be referenced in the TEM (Tool Equipment Manual) and will be introduced in the TSM.
The Expert mode will be covered by the introduction of the SWITS in the ESPM (Electrical Standard
Practice Manual) and through specific training.
For more information on the SWITS tool, please contact the GSE and Tools team through TRM
on AirbusWorld.
For more information on the on-site troubleshooting service, please contact SEEA5 team through TRM.
Health monitoring
and prognostics
Airbus has combined
its extensive knowledge
of aircraft with the vast amount
of data collected by airlines
to offer them the possibility
of predicting maintenance
needs and maximise their
operational efficiency.
Article by
Pierre SEYTE In recent years, aircraft have become increasingly complex, generating vast amounts
Diagnostic and Prognostic Solutions of data through countless parameters especially since the A380 and A350 XWB.
Domain Leader
At the same time, efficiency of operations has never been so important for airlines.
AIRBUS
Flights are more frequent, the number of destinations increases, and delaying or cancelling
pierre.seyte@airbus.com
a flight due to unplanned maintenance has, more than ever, heavy consequences for airlines.
The main stake for airlines is now to move from a reactive mode to a pro-active mode
Caroline PEREIRA GARCIA
by turning unscheduled maintenance into scheduled maintenance.
Marketing Manager M&E applications
AIRBUS In this context, Airbus offers a complete set of solutions and services that monitor the health
caroline.pereira-garcia@airbus.com of aircraft and can accurately predict their future needs.
85#TSAF
63
Health monitoring and prognostics
85#TSAF
73
The opportunity
Analytical techniques including Big Data are making a difference in many industries
and are a source of great potential in aerospace. Analysing data before, during
and after the flight enables a better understanding of the aircraft’s status and
optimisation of its operations.
Leveraging these growing amounts of data represents the ground material for
improvements in flight operations, reliability, maintenance and ultimately safety.
One concrete outcome for operators and maintenance providers is to be able
to anticipate failures before they occur via prognostics.
However, these techniques only deliver value when combined with business
knowledge: Airbus’ unique knowledge of the aircraft and the airlines’ understanding
of the aircraft’s operations. This winning formula is not only about raising alerts
on future issues but also proposing actionable solutions to them.
The Airbus difference
Firstly, as a major aircraft manufacturer, Airbus has been gathering extensive experience
in aircraft health monitoring, and has privileged access to worldwide fleet and unparal-
leled understanding of aircraft systems. Airbus owns valuable knowledge on how to
optimise aircraft operations through its Support Engineering and Design Office experts,
its AIRTAC (Airbus Technical AOG Centre) teams who solve AOG situations,
and a continuous improvement process combining Airbus and customers’ reviews.
Secondly, with Airbus Smarter Fleet®, Airbus collaborates with IBM to ease data
gathering, analytics and processes. Airbus Smarter Fleet® is a unique platform
of integrated solutions where all services share valuable information, via Big Data
techniques and which can be tailored to specific needs.
In addition to this, particular attention is given to the user experience, which is key
to gaining alignment with the customers’ expectations and receiving final acceptance
from end-users.
Based on this approach, Airbus has been developing applications and services which
cover the full aircraft health monitoring value chain, from prognostics to diagnostics
and support to troubleshooting.
s
m
ho n C
Al g o v r a
it
li d
ati
D O e f s fi i c g e n s o u B f p a f p i c c o k e rt
fe
e d b
u
a c s k t o m e r AIRMAN-web
Prognostics and
Customer CORE Ops
Risk Management
Services TEAM Centre
A
d
lg
e fin iti o
o
r i
n
th m
s
e In xp -s e e r r ie v n ic c e e F t l e ig s h t t Air c
x
r a
p
f t erti s e
AIRMAN-web
E
Expert
AiRTHM
The Airbus Lab
Composed of all of Airbus’ internal skills and the customer’s experience,
the Lab provides Airbus’ customers with maximum value solutions and services.
The objective of Airbus is to provide the maximum contextual information to the
airlines’ maintenance and engineering teams in order for them to manage in-flight
events efficiently and even be able to anticipate their occurrence. Using these health
monitoring tools, the airline can avoid operational interruptions.
85#TSAF
83
Health monitoring and prognostics
Diagnostics
and troubleshooting
support
The first step when a failure occurs is to make a quick and reliable diagnosis in order
to ensure fast troubleshooting and reduce delay for the next dispatch.
Used by more than 140 customers on around 7000 aircraft, AIRMAN-web is Airbus’
aircraft health monitoring tool. It constantly monitors the aircraft systems’ health and
transmits faults and warning messages to ground control, providing rapid access
to maintenance documents and troubleshooting steps.
In parallel with AIRMAN-web, Airbus offers a service called AiRTHM, dedicated to A380
and A350 XWB operators. In this case an internal Airbus team manages the airline’s
fleet and provides guidance on optimised maintenance and real-time troubleshooting.
Based on the strengths of both AIRMAN-web and AiRTHM, Airbus has decided
to provide the Airbus expertise used for the AiRTHM service through AIRMAN-web
to enable airline users to go further in diagnostics and troubleshooting. This new
module, called AIRMAN-web Expert, allows the user to get very detailed information
on the technical event diagnostics, operational impact and troubleshooting steps
to be followed, using the uplinks feature to troubleshoot aircraft in real-time.
AiRTHM service
AiRTHM is the service dedicated to A380 and A350 XWB operators to support them
in diagnostics and troubleshooting activities.
This service consists of an Airbus 24/7 dedicated team, located in the AIRTAC centre,
which monitors the airline fleet, analyses the aircraft data and, when an event is
observed, provides appropriate recommendations to the airline.
AiRTHM currently offers two services, Pre-Departure Check and Flight Watch.
For the Pre-Departure Check, the Airbus team monitors particular systems of the aircraft
that may impact the dispatch before it leaves the gate. They particularly look at potential
failures during flight preparation, pre-departure delay drivers and provide on-demand
assistance in case of a return to gate procedure.
The Flight Watch service provides monitoring of the aircraft during the flight and in this
case the Airbus team tracks the ECAM (Electronic Centralised Aircraft Monitor) alerts
and fault messages sent by the aircraft.
In addition to the knowledge and expertise of the Airbus engineers, the team is also
able to collect additional data such as Aircraft Condition Monitoring System (ACMS)
reports, Smart Access Recorder (SAR) and Quick Access Recorder (QAR) files,
and do automatic uplinks in real-time. The collected data then allows the Airbus team
to perform accurate engineering analysis and provide corresponding dispatch and
troubleshooting advice to the airline.
All monitored events are registered in Case Analysis Templates (CAT) files in order
to build a knowledge base.
Today, AiRTHM is used by several A380 operators and all A350 XWB operators
in the early days after entry-into-service.
85#TSAF
93
Health monitoring and prognostics
At gate In flight Airline MCC
Feedback
Uplink
technology
Advice
Expertise
Analysis on Continuous
Root cause improving
AiRTHM team
identification process
Back office Customer Design Flight
support Services Office Test
AIRMAN-web Expert
AIRMAN-web Expert has been developed to offer a software solution enhancing
troubleshooting on A380s and soon also on A350 XWBs.
This solution was born from Airbus’ objective to allow customers to benefit from
its extensive knowledge of aircraft and from customer requests to optimise information
in AIRMAN-web. The objective of AIRMAN-web Expert is to guide the Maintenance
Control Centre (MCC) in diagnostics and troubleshooting by providing access to
a knowledge database.
This database contains enriched data and features like correlation of multiple fault
codes, direct access to necessary technical documentation and ACMS data uplink
request capability.
Focusing on complex technical events which have the most impact, the MCC users
can base their troubleshooting decisions on Airbus’ expertise contained in CAT files.
Airbus
knowledge These files explain all information related to the failure and propose expected remedial
database
actions. They also allow to uplink specific ACMS parameters in order to confirm the fault
and determine the root cause.
The knowledge shared in AIRMAN-web Expert is based on AiRTHM expertise and will
continuously be enriched with both Airbus’ and the airlines’ experience.
With this new module, the MCC can speed-up its diagnosis, save time in troubleshooting
and so in the end reduce operational interruptions for improved aircraft availability.
With AIRMAN-web Expert and AiRTHM, Airbus provides a complete offer for diagnostics
and troubleshooting activities, giving the choice to the airline between a service ensured
by Airbus with AiRTHM or the autonomy of its MCC with AIRMAN-web Expert.
Correlated
uplinks
(when
needed)
Aircraft
messages
Airline
feedback
Airbus
expertise
Alert
Airline
decision
Health monitoring and prognostics
Prognostics
Example of PRM efficiency
In order to be a step ahead of technical events, the airline can use prognostics
in Delta Air Lines
and in this case the objective is to avoid unplanned events by detecting system failures
before they occur. Between April 2015 and May 2016,
11 PRVs (Pressure Regulating
Airbus has developed an application called Prognostics and Risk Management (PRM)
Valves) and 1 HPV (High Pressure
which provides early detection of failures, enhancing aircraft availability and reducing
Valve) were removed in scheduled
unscheduled maintenance.
maintenance visits thanks to the
A study made on the A330 fleet, revealed that up to 15% of the entire operational PRM Pneumatics alert before failure.
interruptions could be avoided using a prognostics solution like PRM. Aircraft operations were maintained
without any delays and maintenance
Prognostics and Risk Management activities were properly scheduled
and organised.
Thanks to a proof of concept done with 3 airlines between 2013 and mid-2014, the
In this example, all the removed PRV
capability to detect in anticipation unplanned failures has been formally demonstrated.
and HPV were later confirmed
This milestone was the start point of the industrialisation of the PRM application.
“faulty” on test bench in the shop.
From April 2015 a one year “in-service evaluation phase” was set up in collaboration with
Delta Air Lines allowing users to fine-tune the algorithms and features of the application.
PRM was born.
Today, with Delta Air Lines as its launch customer, PRM is a chargeable service
With Airbus’ Prognostics and Risk
with fully demonstrated and recognised benefits.
Management, we will leverage the
The principle of PRM is quite simple. It uses the Flight Data Interface Management Unit strong expertise of Airbus’ design
(FDIMU) capabilities and its Aircraft Condition Monitoring System (ACMS) function office to provide us with the most
to record a particular set of data at a very precise timeframe of the flight, that features effective way to monitor our aircraft
a specific signature, identified by Airbus Design Office engineers as a weak signal systems.
to a future failure.
Prognostic alerting will allow our
It is in the ACMS load, a customised database, that all this needed data is defined with Engineering and Maintenance teams
its associated recording conditions. This load, delivered by Airbus to PRM customers, to detect in advance failures on
has to be fitted onto the FDIMU system of the aircraft monitored by PRM. No software our components and systems
changes are necessary. to mitigate possible operational
interruptions. PRM will also help
At the end of the flight, all the recorded data that has been merged by the FDIMU is
us maximise our A330 aircraft
made into a unique ACMS report. This report is automatically transmitted to the Airbus
turnaround and systems’ reliability
server on ground using the ACARS network.
and efficiency and move mainte-
Finally, thanks to algorithms defined by data scientists in collaboration with Airbus Design nance events from unscheduled
Office specialists and Airbus Customer Support experts, PRM computes the collected to scheduled.
parameters and displays aircraft systems degradation. Based on threshold and target
values defined by Airbus, it can then alert the engineering teams that a failure might occur.
Jim Jackson,
Additional data, like ECAM alerts and BITE (Built In Test Equipment) messages from Post
Manager of Predictive Maintenance
Flight Reports, is also used to correlate detections with failures when no preventive Engineering at Delta Air Lines
maintenance was launched. In this case, PRM brings additional information that can be
useful to improve troubleshooting. ECAM alerts can be displayed on the same graph as
the prediction trends, hence allowing better customisation of alerting thresholds.
PRM is a web application accessible by any user from any location and only needs
an Internet connection to be usable. The application is very easy to use and can be
customised by the user. For example, it allows the information to be accessed by the
aircraft and/or by ATA chapter. There are also filtering options allowing the user to
customise the screen display (by event priority, by aircraft programme, by MSN…).
Prediction alerts can be based on either Airbus’ pre-defined thresholds or user-defined
thresholds according to the airline’s strategy of risk mitigation.
PRM is currently available for A330 fleet and will soon be expanding. The 10 existing
predictions on A330 aircraft are going to be completed by a new set of algorithms
by the end of 2016. An in-service evaluation phase will be launched on the Single Aisle
fleet (A319, A320, A321) in October 2016 with a selected number of airlines who have
already expressed their wish to experiment with this new concept on their own fleet.
A350 XWB PRM will be available to airlines at the beginning of 2017 and the A380 PRM
in the following months.
85#TSAF
04
‘‘
’’
ACARS Aircraft Communication Addressing
and Reporting System
ACMS Aircraft Condition Monitoring System
AIRMAN AIRcraft Maintenance ANalysis
AiRTHM Airbus Real-Time Health Monitoring
BITE Built In Test Equipment
DAR Digital ACMS Recorder
ECAM Electronic Centralised Aircraft Monitor
FDIMU Flight Data Interface Management Unit
HMI Human Machine Interface
MCC Maintenance Control Centre
PRM Prognostics and Risk Management
QAR Quick Access Recorder
SAR Smart Access Recorder
Health monitoring and prognostics
85#TSAF
14
USER DATE
Engine 2 PRV slow to close (seconds) A9F_USR1 2016-07-05
FLIGHT BEFORE FLIGHT AFTER
100 A9F126 A9F127
90 DESCRIPTION
80 Valve removed tested NOK.
70 New valve installed
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Flights
Example of ATA36 Event details displaying
PRV closure degradation and associated
maintenance action (here PRV replaced) New data sources
allowing the recovery to normal behaviour
of the PRV.
Airbus looks to the future and constantly generates initiatives to improve the accuracy
and relevance of its models and predictions. As more data can be pushed to the
ground, it is possible to build more models using Big Data techniques that also allow
an improved accuracy of failure localisation.
An experimental phase has been launched, in cooperation with easyJet, where DAR
Heat exchanger efficiency (Digital ACMS Recorder) as well as maintenance data is used to make predictions.
(Efficiency rate) DAR data represents several megabytes of data sent to the ground instead of the
FLIGHT FROM TO
0.90 Ap9rFe1v2io6usly KlimBOiteSd feEwH kAiMlobytes. This DAR data collected through WiFi or cellular
0.88 EcNaDpEaDbi lOitiNes gives additional opportunities for Airbus to develop new prediction models
0.86 1in5 /c6/o2o0p16eration with external companies such as Palantir or IBM.
0.84 VALUE
0C.7om37p9a5red to PRM and AiRTHM, these models are built through a different methodology.
0.82
WPARRMN IaNnGd AiRTHM models are based on system design and ACMS data, whereas this
0.80
MAINTENANCE STATUS CAB TEMP
new approach will analyse aircraft data in a statistical way to find correlations between
0.78 P1 HX(521MH19XHH18y PLENUM(52HH117)
faults and symptoms and be able to identify prognostic models.
0.76
0.74 In this context, new HMIs (Human Machine Interface), strongly integrated in the airlines’
0.72 operational systems have been designed to provide actionable items (pending tools,
resources, spares’ availabilities) at the best time in order to minimise impact on aFirlcigrahftt s
operations.
The prototype will be delivered to easyJet by the end of September 2016 for a 6-month
“proof of concept” phase during which both Airbus and easyJet will monitor the
efficiency of the models, their accuracy, and also assess the benefits of the front end
HMI with its strong integration with airline systems.
From systems to…
Today, enhanced troubleshooting or prognostics mainly target systems, whereas other
areas such as cabins and airframe are for the moment overlooked. Considering their
potential, Airbus has made these areas its next challenge.
As new passive sensors become increasingly available, this new technology promises
Airbus Smarter Fleet® is a trademark of Airbus just the beginning of many benefits and applications.
CONCLUSION
Big Data and connected aircraft are key success factors for enhanced maintenance operations.
Thanks to this consistent approach, continuous development and improvement, Airbus covers all its customers’ needs
from improved troubleshooting to prognostics. Based on the expertise of its Design Office, and supported by several
operators for in-service experience, Airbus is now positioning itself centrally in this very promising market.
Tomorrow’s maintenance will be very different to what was done a few years ago. Prognostics is not only a new
concept; it is a completely new paradigm for aircraft maintenance in the future.
8855##TTSSAAFF
2244
egatireH
etaroproC
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
sotohP
FAST
from the PAST
There wouldn’t be any future without the experience of the past.
The Junkers JU 52 had a robust
look and feel despite its - literally -
‘glass cockpit’*.
The sturdy levers, cranks, taps
and dials, as well as its unusual
corrugated aluminium alloy skin,
earned her the nickname
“Iron Annie”.
The streamlined, harmonised cockpits found in all Airbus aircraft
today are a far cry from the JU 52.
Each Airbus cockpit is ergonomically designed for flying that
particular aircraft with ease and efficiency, but the cockpit also
consistently adheres to the principles of flight operational
commonality (see article page 4).
The flexibility created by a coherent cockpit design and fly-by-
wire technology across the entire Airbus fleet reduces training
time, increases pilot productivity, and simplifies rostering.
Operational commonality was a conscious commercial
decision made with the inception of the A320 and over the last
25 years has been applied to the cockpit of each new generation
of Airbus aircraft.
*The term ‘glass cockpit’ is used to distinguish cockpits
using LCD displays.
85#TSAF
34
Around the clock, around the world
Airbus has more than 240 field representatives based in over 110 cities
WORLDWIDE TECHNICAL, MATERIAL & LOGISTICS TRAINING CENTRES
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 1980 Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Airbus Training Centre
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 1818 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 Toulouse, France
Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3333
USA/CANADA airtac@airbus.com Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094
Tel: +1 703 834 3484
Airbus Maintenance
Fax: +1 703 834 3464 Spares AOG/Work Stoppage
Training Centre
• Outside the Americas:
Hamburg, Germany
CHINA Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011
Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8588
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162 aog.spares@airbus.com
• In the Americas: Airbus Training Centre Americas
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Tel: +1 70 3729 9000 Miami, Florida - U.S.A.
ADMINISTRATION Fax: +1 70 3729 4373 Tel: +1 305 871 3656
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936 aog.na@airbus.com Fax: +1 305 871 4649
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964
Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas: Airbus Training Centre Beijing
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002 Tel: + 86 10 8047 5341
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
Airbus Training Centre Bangalore
ifd.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +91 9880065511
Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas: Airbus Training Centre Delhi
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003 Tel: +91 9880065511
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
Airbus Middle East FZE Dubai
hmv.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +971 4 602 78 62
Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas: Training by Airbus Jakarta
Please contact your dedicated customer spares jerome.dartus@airbus.com
account representative csr.na@airbus.com
Airbus Asia Training Centre Singapore
yueyu.he@airbus.com
How can I keep my
business flying?
Ask for Services by Airbus.
Our expertise and innovation
ensure your aircraft is kept to
the highest standards of safety,
productivity and efficiency
for years to come.
Airbus is the answer.
airbus.com
© AIRBUS, 2016. All rights reserved. Airbus, its logo and the product names are registered trademarks.
PWW9-STUDIO:Airbus:2016:Airbus:B1362-001013_2016:12186_AIR_QA_Master_2016:12186_AIR_QA_Services_Master_297x210_1.1
KROWTRA 12186_AIR_QA_Services_Master_297x210_1.1 johnsp
297 x 210 mm
PMS
3 mm
Master PMS
Page 1 PMS
5 July 2016 4:20 PM PMS
