Airbus technical magazine
November 2016
A380 Special edition
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Alain FLOURENS
Head of the A380
Programme
Dear Airbus friends,
With the 200th A380 delivery coming up this year,
we wanted to give you an update on this unique
aircraft and its evolution, in a special edition of FAST.
A380 operations are certainly extending. Since January
this year, we have seen 15 new routes, 8 new
destinations and the world’s longest-ever direct flight
between Dubai and Auckland.
We at Airbus firmly believe the A380 is a cost-effective
and versatile solution for customers and for increasingly
congested hubs, such as Heathrow and Hong Kong.
We have therefore been continuously working
to improve operations, facilitate maintenance
and increase profitability of the aircraft, in
particular with an optimised cabin space.
We are now offering improved cabin layouts that
allow for the best class segmentation so airlines
can optimise revenues. This increased cabin
flexibility also meets market needs, in line with
new travelling trends and the growing traffic
in regions such as Asia and the Middle East.
With its still unbeaten comfort features of
quietness, smoothness of flight and seat width,
the A380 remains a unique experience
and a firm favourite for air travel, with 60%
of A380 passengers actually ready to make
an extra effort to fly the aircraft again.
You can read more in the article on page 28.
To encourage even more passengers to enjoy
the experience, Airbus has created an A380
website, iflyA380.com, that gives information
about A380 destinations, flights, airline
operators and passenger feedback.
iflyA380.com also incorporates a tool to facilitate
A380 bookings with airlines. This is only a first step
and we have other ideas to promote the A380 directly
to passengers.
And looking ahead, for those customers interested in the
second-hand market, we are ready with support including
cabin reconfiguration, training and operations.
The A380 Special edition gives you a 360° view of our
iconic aircraft’s evolution and our efforts to make it even
more profitable and attractive.
Enjoy the tour and discover - or re-discover - the A380!
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
20
04
10
Pilots at the controls of the A380 22
Passenger experience 28
Ensuring the best A380 cabins 34
Innovative systems
42
and aircraft design
Capability and profitability
50
enhancements
Service packages
60
to optimise operations
Field representatives 63
© AIRBUS 2016
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted by the delivery of this Magazine than the right
to read it, for the sole purpose of information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the materials it
contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive or other information that is correct at the time of going
to press. This information involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in this document
or with respect to the information described herein. The statements made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on Airbus information and are expressed in good faith
but no warranty or representation is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for any damage in con-
nection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains, even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given
to the courts and tribunals of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of competent
jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330, A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Photo copyright Airbus. Photo credits: Master Films: Hervé Goussé, A.Doumenjou, P.Pigeyre / Shutterstock: Mislik, mary416, Jorg Hackemann, Sorbis, superjoseph, Philip Lange, Josef
Hanus, EQRoy / Engine Alliance
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
A380 Special edition
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Operational versatility of the A380
The solution for airlines
and airports
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Chief Editor: Deborah BUCKLER
Editor: Emma MUNDAY ALVARADO
Design: PONT BLEU
Cover image: A. Doumenjou
Printer: Amadio
Authorisation for reprinting
FAST magazine articles
should be requested by email:
fast.magazine@airbus.com
FAST magazine is available on internet
www.airbus.com/support/publications
on tablets and smartphones
ISSN 1293-5476
Where you see this icon, a video is available
on the FAST magazine app (Apple & Android).
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
40
Operational versatility
of the
The A380 has made a significant impact on the long-haul
market since its entry-into-service in October 2007.
Article by (left to right) For many airlines, it has taken on the flagship role,
Frank VERMEIRE introducing new levels of passenger comfort and
Head of A380 Marketing
amenities, resulting in widespread passenger praise.
AIRBUS
frank.vermeire@airbus.com
The variety of operations from short to ultra long-haul
Kenneth BRIGHT markets, and from 4-class to 2-class, demonstrates
Head of Fleet & Network Profitability
the A380’s flexibility, and that it brings solutions
AIRBUS
ken.bright@airbus.com to increasing passenger traffic.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
50
Operational versatility of the A380
Optimised flights
Today, A380 operations span the globe with over 110 routes to 55 destinations.
The three major airline alliances are represented. The A380 has a significant presence
at the world’s biggest hubs such as Dubai, Los Angeles and Hong Kong. It has been
a key enabler for slot-constrained airports to maintain their growth.
At London Heathrow, one of the most congested airports in the world, there are now
56 daily A380 flights representing 8% of the airport’s passenger traffic.
Seoul Hong
Vancouver
Kong Kuala
Washington Lumpur
x1 Bangkok
San Francisco x1 x1
x1 x2
x1
x1
x1 Singapore
London
Los Angeles
x2 x3
x2
x1
x6 Dubai
Miami x1
x2
x2
Abu Dhabi
Johannesburg
Doha
British Airways (BA), London’s home carrier, has used the A380 to consolidate
frequencies and release valuable slots for new destinations. Up until the summer of
2013, BA operated 3 daily B747 flights on the London to Los Angeles route. This was
replaced with a twice-daily A380 service which offered the same seat capacity, but
lowered the daily trip operating cost by nearly 20%. This consolidation offers more
capacity at the peak time when passengers want to travel. In addition, BA A380s are
configured to accommodate 5% more premium passengers, leading to higher overall
revenue than on its B747s. Beyond the improvement in efficiency, freeing up a
valuable slot for new route development was a key benefit for an airline operating
at such a constrained airport.
BA is not alone in using the A380 to consolidate capacity. Thai Airways replaced a
10x weekly B777-300ER service with a daily A380 on the Bangkok to Paris CDG
route. There are numerous other cases of operators consolidating a mix of daily and
twice-daily services into a daily A380 to optimise the network and focus on peak
travel times. Other operators have used the A380 to boost their growth to particular
destinations which are either highly constrained, or demonstrate a strong time-of-day
preference. In 2008, Singapore Airlines, the first to operate the A380, switched all of
its 3 daily B747 frequencies to A380s on the London to Singapore route to capture
the high levels of demand.
The A380 has also brought solutions to market seasonality, a phenomenon seen in
many markets. Lufthansa deploys the A380 on routes which see high peak season
demand such as Frankfurt to San Francisco. By deploying the A380 during the 6 to
8-month summer period, it receives a significant boost in revenue thanks to the 60%
capacity increase. Beyond the increase in capacity on the route it flies, the A380 also
has a dramatic effect on connecting traffic. Traffic figures show the introduction of the
A380 on SFO-FRA increased connecting traffic volume via Frankfurt by nearly 80%.
The additional passenger volume and revenue on regional and domestic feeder flights
give operators the opportunity to benefit from more competitive unit costs due to the
A380’s greater economies of scale.
Birmingham
Manchester Copenhagen
Moscow
Amsterdam Prague
Vancouver Dusseldorf
London
Frankfurt
Toronto Paris Munich
Vienna
Boston Zurich Seoul
Milan
San Francisco New York Madrid
Dallas Rome Beijing
Washington Barcelona
Tokyo
Kuwait Chengdu
Los Angeles Atlanta Dubai New Delhi Osaka
Shanghai
Houston Doha Hong Kong
Miami Taipei
Mumbai
Jeddah Guangzhou
Abu Dhabi
Mexico
Bangkok
Kuala Lumpur
Abidjan Singapore
A380 hubs
Future A380 routes
Brisbane
Mauritius
Current A380 routes
Johannesburg Sydney
Perth Auckland
OAG data at September 2016 Melbourne
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
60
Operational versatility of the A380
An outstanding payload range performance gives the A380 The 8,600 nautical mile trip (elapsed travel time of 17 hours, 15
the ability to fly some of the longest routes in the world. minutes) will be one of the longest scheduled flights in the world.
On the Dallas to Sydney route, Qantas previously operated The convenience of a non-stop flight is particularly sought after
B747-400ERs, which had to make a technical refuelling stop by premium passengers, giving A380 operators the added
in Brisbane. When Qantas started flying the A380, it was able advantage of attracting higher yields. In addition, the exceptional
to fly the route non-stop to Sydney. Similarly, Emirates operates space and comfort of the A380 is greatly appreciated by
several ultra long-haul routes from Dubai, passengers who travel on ultra long-haul flights.
including Los Angeles and Dallas. Emirates has recently
announced the latest addition to its ultra long-haul network,
a non-stop A380 flight from Dubai to Auckland.
Operational versatility of the A380
The A380 offers its operators the space to innovate with new passenger amenities
such as bars, showers and duty-free shops. Etihad introduced ‘The Residence’ a
class beyond first. With a separate bedroom and seating area, it provides a flying
experience close to that offered on a corporate jet. All these amenities serve to
increase the level of service beyond the seat and allow A380 operators to further
differentiate themselves from the competition. As illustrated by the famous ‘flying
A380 bar’, operators are successfully marketing these amenities to the public.
The resulting product awareness influences passengers to seek out A380 flights.
Over the past nine years of A380 operations, passenger feedback regarding the
unprecedented space and comfort offered by the A380 has been overwhelmingly
positive. Surveys have shown that, given a choice, passengers clearly prefer travelling
on the A380 compared to other competing aircraft types – and that many passengers
say they are willing to pay a premium to travel on the A380. (Read more in Passenger
Experience on page 28.)
These positive survey results and strong anecdotal support for the A380 ran counter
to the conventional wisdom of some who assumed that the A380’s larger size would
require operators to discount fares in order to fill the additional seats.
Birmingham
Manchester Copenhagen
Moscow
Amsterdam Prague
Vancouver Dusseldorf
London
Frankfurt
Toronto Paris Munich
Vienna
Boston Zurich Seoul
Milan
San Francisco New York Madrid
Dallas Rome Beijing
Washington Barcelona
Tokyo
Kuwait Chengdu
Los Angeles Atlanta Dubai New Delhi Osaka
Shanghai
Houston Doha Hong Kong
Miami Taipei
Mumbai
Jeddah Guangzhou
Abu Dhabi
Mexico
Bangkok
Kuala Lumpur
Abidjan Singapore
A380 hubs
Future A380 routes
Brisbane
Mauritius
Current A380 routes
Johannesburg Sydney
Perth Auckland
OAG data at September 2016 Melbourne
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
70
Greater
passenger
appeal,
greater
demand
Operational versatility of the A380
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
80
The Wingtip Study
Airbus designed a scientific ‘apples-to-apples’ real-world comparison, known as the
Wingtip Study, to test whether passengers are truly willing to pay more to enjoy the
extra space and comfort of the A380. The study took its name directly from airline
scheduling terminology; ‘wingtip departures’ occur when an airline schedules two of
its aircraft to fly from the same origin to the same destination, departing within a very
short time of each other – almost as if the two aircraft are flying wingtip-to-wingtip
in formation towards their shared destination.
The Wingtip Study looked for real-world examples of airlines operating both the B777
and the A380 in tandem as wingtip departures. By using this type of head-to-head
comparison, all of the variables that might otherwise distort a comparison between
aircraft types were eliminated.
Airbus identified two examples of A380s and B777s being operated together to
create wingtip departures. In the first case, Air France operated daily B777 and A380
departures from New York to Paris with only 45 minutes between the two flights.
In the second example, British Airways scheduled daily A380 and B777 departures
from Hong Kong to London with only 15 minutes between the two flights.
Because the wingtip departures were operated by a single airline at nearly the same
time, it was possible to determine if a customer preferred a specific aircraft type.
Any distorting criteria that might have existed due to the time of departure, choice
of airline, on-board product, or potential connections at the hub, were completely
eliminated because both flights were nearly identical in all of the above respects.
The only real difference between the two wingtip flights was the type of aircraft used
to operate them – so any passenger preference for one aircraft over the other would
be easily identified.
Following five months of detailed analysis, the study’s findings clearly supported what
passengers had been saying all along: that they prefer to travel on the A380, and they
are willing to pay a premium to do so. Far from A380 operators having to discount
their fares, the above Wingtip Study examples showed that an A380 fare premium
already exists in all classes.
In the case of Air France’s JFK-CDG wingtip departures, average business class fares
on the A380 were $74 higher than those on the corresponding B777 flight, while
average A380 economy class tickets cost $25 more than those on the similarly-timed
B777 flight.
Business class fare comparison A380 vs B777
JFK to CDG
$9 000
$8 000
$7 000
$6 000
$5 000 B777
A380
$4 000
$3 000
$2 000
$1 000
$0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Days prior to departure
)$SU(
eraf
ssalc
ssenisub
pirt-dnuor
egarevA
The study demonstrates
that A380 passengers
have been choosing
aircraft type ahead of
cost, and are already
willing to pay a premium
to travel aboard the A380.
Average fares within 14 days prior to departure:
A380 fares are 1 .5% higher(~$116 )
Average fares within 80 days prior to departure:
A380 fares are 1.2% higher(~$74)
Operational versatility of the A380
CONCLUSION
How the A380 market will develop in the future can be seen by looking at long-term worldwide traffic
forecasts which show a doubling of passenger traffic every 15 years. Furthermore, the proportion of global
traffic which will pass through megacities (cities with over 10,000 daily long-haul passengers) will increase
from 90% today to 93% by 2024. As a result, the pressure on big hub airports, many of which are
congested today, will only increase. Airport upgrades needed to absorb traffic growth, can take many years
and may meet objections from local communities. Large aircraft such as the A380 offer an immediate
solution to airlines, airports and travellers alike.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
90
Future opportunities for the A380
So what is the next step in the way operators fly the A380? The A380 is nearing its
first decade of service and, as with all other aircraft programmes, some of the first
A380s will move into the second-hand market. Exploring the A380’s second-hand
market potential reveals new opportunities such as the Hajj/Umrah pilgrimages.
An airline’s challenge during the Hajj pilgrimage is to transport the largest possible
number of pilgrims over the shortest period of time. They must also minimize the
number of days (or weeks) pilgrims must wait in the country before and after the event
until they can secure space to return home. No aircraft makes more economic sense
than the largest one, the A380. However, how can an airline optimise use of the
aircraft during the rest of the year?
The development of Umrah, a pilgrimage made outside of the Hajj period, could be
the answer. Umrah traffic is already 4 times the size of Hajj overall. Today, this market
is predominantly served by ageing B747s which must be replaced over the next few
years. Not only does the A380 offer the right capacity, but it also has a 20-30%
reduction in cost per seat vs the B747.
The solution for airlines
and airports
The A380’s unique high capacity can bring value not only
to airlines, but also to airports by helping to solve airport
congestion.
Most megacity airports are congested, with slots being
a nearly priceless resource. Limited slots mean airlines
are unable to accommodate passenger demand at peak
Article by (left to right)
times. The A380 is ideally suited to high-volume trunk
Willy-Pierre DUPONT
routes between expanding megacities. Senior Expert Airport Operations
AIRBUS
willy-pierre.dupont@airbus.com
New definitions for wake vortex separations enable
Céline BOYON
the A380 to easily integrate traffic whilst offering
A380 Marketing Manager
greater capacity. AIRBUS
celine.boyon@airbus.com
The A380 has proven that it can be integrated into airport Laurent BOISSON
Airports & Product Competitiveness
operations, show ing strong advantages against other very
AIRBUS
large aircraft. Today, 230 airports can welcome the A380, laurent.boisson@airbus.com
and this trend is increasing.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
01
The solution for airlines and airports
Airport congestion
More demand, more traffic
Passenger air traffic has doubled every 15 years since the early 1980’s. Although
the world endured various crises, with difficult periods for the air transport industry,
the long-term growth trend was quickly re-established. Today, solid growth drivers
for the industry are in place with, at the forefront, the economic dynamism of
emerging countries. Demand is set to continue and is even expected to double
again in the next 15 years. The Airbus 20-year forecast shows an expected average
annual growth rate of 4.5%.
World annual traffic (trillion RPK)
ICAO total traffic Airbus GMF 2016: 4.5% growth p.a.
18
16
14
12
10
8
x2 x2
6
4 x2
2
0
1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035
RPK Revenue Passenger-Kilometre
GMF Global Market Forecast More traffic, bigger megacities
In 2014, another five urban centres became aviation megacities, meaning hubs with
more than 10,000 daily long-haul passengers. The largest is currently London, with
120,000 – the only city today handling more than 100,000 daily long-haul passengers.
In 2014, there were on average 10,000 landings per month per runway at London
Heathrow. Dubai, the main hub of the Middle East, is second largest with 98,000
passengers. However, 20 years from now, all of the 10 largest aviation megacities will
have daily traffic of over 100,000 daily long-haul passengers. Together, these 10 cities
will transport 1.5 million long-haul passengers each day.
Bigger megacities, bigger aircraft
To support the increase in demand, airlines around the world have responded by
developing their networks. Service has been extended to new airport pairs, and more
airlines have started flying on existing routes. In parallel to the development of air
services, airlines are increasingly using larger aircraft. Over the past ten years, the
number of seats per flight has grown by 20% the highest ten-year increase since the
1970’s. The trend towards larger aircraft is a result of airline efforts to become more
productive through the transportation of passengers at a lower cost per seat, but also
a result of airport congestion. Increasingly, airports reach their limits in terms of slot
capacity, consequently affecting air traffic management. At these airports, an increase
in traffic is only possible by using larger aircraft in the short to medium term.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
11
Hub-and-spoke* concerned by congestion
With the deregulation of the air transport sector, carriers have become free to make *Hub-and-spoke: Aircraft deployment method
strategic choices on fares and network structures, which has led to a concentration in which a carrier designates one or more
strategically located cities as hubs to which
of traffic on the spoke routes. The success of hub-and-spoke structures in the years
its larger aircraft bring most of its passengers
following the deregulation is explained partly by the savings from operating fewer
and cargo through many scheduled
routes and partly by the economies of scale from using larger aircraft to absorb traffic flights. The passengers and cargo are then
density. However, this concentration of traffic from hub-and-spoke networks has con- taken to their respective destinations by
tributed to greater airport congestion. In congested hubs, a high proportion of flights smaller aircraft belonging to the same carrier
or smaller (commuter or feeder) airlines
are affected by delays, cancellations and missed connections that end up affecting
under a code-sharing arrangement.
both air travellers and airlines. Congestion is therefore a major concern and a relevant
policy issue.
80% of megacities are congested
Congestion occurs when airports cannot fully cope with demand. IATA (International
Air Transport Association) has been at the forefront of ensuring a fair, neutral and
transparent allocation of airport slots at the world’s most congested airports through
2024 aviation megacities
the application of the Worldwide Slot Guidelines (WSG). Over 170 airports are formally
designated as Level 3 (most congested, requiring slots), and this number is expected
Capacity control is already in place
to grow significantly due to a lack of investment in airport infrastructure to cope with
increasing demand.
IATA level 3
mandatory slot control
IATA level 2
Level 3: capacity is constrained due to
lack of sufficient infrastructure.
Level 2: potential for congestion during
some periods of the day, week, or
season which can be resolved by
voluntary cooperation between airlines.
Level 1: capacity of the airport
infrastructure is generally adequate to meet
the demands of airport users at all times.
New airport infrastructures
not the fastest and easiest solution
Airport infrastructure projects are not easy to implement. They take time, involve
many stakeholders and are frequently delayed. Sometimes, even if infrastructure
projects are achieved, they are not always the solution. If there is congestion on
the ground, the same applies to the sky. Additional runways do not always solve
the airspace congestion, as shown in Guangzhou, China, where despite a new
third runway, slots remain limited due to airspace congestion.
In these types of cases, solving congestion becomes much more complex for
the airports and airlines.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-
TSAF
21
The solution for airlines and airports
The solution for airlines and airports
Secondary airports not covering overflow
When an airport is constrained, nearby airports do not always capture the entire
passenger overflow. Airlines can lose revenue by putting seat capacity at lowest yield
at secondary airports, and miss network and hub efficiency. The number of passen-
gers travelling through London Heathrow has grown at less than 1% on average per
year since 2000; during this same period, London’s other airports have grown at
nearly twice that rate. However GDP* indicates that Heathrow should have handled
nearly 15 million more passengers than it did in 2013. It would be logical to assume
those passengers, squeezed out of Heathrow, would have simply turned to nearby
airports. But London’s other airports captured only about half of this overflow.
*GDP Gross Domestic Product (strongly correlated to air traffic growth)
A380: capacity to cope with airport congestion
Due to its size and capacity, the A380 is the most efficient way to capture traffic at
the most concentrated places and times, maximising revenue for airlines by seizing the
strong passenger flow at the highest yield times. The A380 increases capacity on trunk
routes, boosts connecting traffic and strengthens hub position. By consolidating routes
with the A380, airlines increase seat capacity while creating economies of scale, as
well as freeing up airport slots, or using current slots and adding more passengers.
The A380’s high capacity
plays a key role
in solving airport congestion
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
31
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
41
The solution for airlines and airports
Relieving congestion and freeing up slots by airport chief executives
Hong Kong International Airport is Asia’s busiest.
A plane lands or takes off every minute; but the
airport is built on re-claimed land so expanding
isn’t simple.
The way forward for the local authorities
is persuading airlines to bring more passengers
in and out on bigger aircraft like the A380.
Eight airlines already fly A380s into Hong Kong;
and last year a milestone was reached there with
the 5000th flight. The airport had nearly 70 million
passengers in 2015 and is keen for that to rise.
Fred LAM says many passengers, especially the
Chinese, choose this airport because of the A380
option. So he has a winning argument to entice
airlines to switch increasingly to bigger aircraft - it
will help them save money.
Our two runway situation at the moment can accommodate about 1100 aircraft
movements per day. We are almost reaching that size capacity, so we are in the
process of building a new runway. But a third runway will not be available for at least
another 8 years, so in the meantime we are doing what we can to encourage airlines
to switch to bigger aircraft, which will hopefully bring us more passengers
to the airport.
Fred LAM
Chief Executive, Hong Kong International Airport
These quotes are extracts from video interviews with airport
chief executives, available on the app version of FAST magazine
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
51
The solution for airlines and airports
Relieving congestion and freeing up slots by airport chief executives
London Heathrow Airport is also the biggest
on its continent with 75 million passengers and a
take-off or landing every 45 seconds, also on just
two runways. Again the solution is bigger planes.
Heathrow is one of the great airports of the world and we are also full. When you are
at capacity you need to have the largest airplanes operating from your airport to be
able to serve more passengers and that is what the A380 does. It’s the largest plane
in the world, it helps us serve more passengers on very busy routes out of Heathrow
and it also frees up slots to serve new routes in North America, South America and
Asia that we wouldn’t otherwise be able to serve.
...
Over the last 30 years the number of people impacted by aircraft noise at Heathrow
has pretty much halved. That’s because of new technology such as the A380 and
it means we can expand Heathrow and still have fewer people impacted by aircraft
noise because of aircraft like the A380. That is why we incite airlines to bring their
quietest and cleanest airplanes like the A380 here to Heathrow.
...
We have re-built Heathrow in the last ten years. We have invested £11 billion to create
this world class airport but of course we have to be able to pay for that and the more
passengers we have coming through, the more affordable we can make it. There is a
virtuous circle there - we are actually reducing our landing fees because we are get-
ting more passengers coming through and the A380 has been key to that in helping
us to have more passengers for every landing and take-off that we have.
John HOLLAND-KAYE
Chief Executive, Heathrow Airport
Both Heathrow and Hong Kong point out that with
extra passenger numbers, their retail and restaurant
outlets emerge winners too. So keen are the two
airports to have A380 traffic, that they have re-
duced landing fees for those planes.
These quotes are extracts from video interviews with airport
chief executives, available on the app version of FAST magazine
Compatible destinations today
Compatible alternates today
Potential compatible alternates
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
61
The solution for airlines and airports
Airport compatibility
The A380 is a very special aircraft, with true benefits for airports and airlines alike.
Since the early days of A380 development, Airbus has been working closely
with airports to expand the network of compatible airports.
A growing network of A380-compatible airports
230 compatible airports today (destinations + alternates)
400 potential compatible airports
The solution for airlines and airports
Working together
The ‘working together’ concept is a collaborative approach generally applied to the
concept phase of a new aircraft whereby airlines are invited to get involved all along
the key milestones of the development programme.
Airbus applied a similar concept with the airports for the A380. Airports took part in
the design by providing their specific requirements, which enabled them to anticipate
future adaptations. Regulators were included in the early stages, as local rule-making
drives airport modifications.
In parallel, the International Industry Working Group (IIWG), a specific group first
created for the Entry-Into-Service (EIS) of the B747 in 1970, unites key industry
stakeholders including airlines, airports, regulators, manufacturers and service
providers. This group enables free flow of information between members, as well as
a close relationship between aviation bodies such as the International Coordinating
Council of Aerospace Industries Associations (ICCAIA), the International Air Transport
Association (IATA) and the Airports Council International (ACI).
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
71
In the first half of 2016, the A380 Latest approved airports
was approved for commercial
operations at: Another crucial criterion for airport compatibility is timeframe. Compatibility mitigation
can solve any issues that may appear in only a few months through operational
MEX (Mexico)
measures, short term investments, etc. For longer-term planned operations or
significant traffic increase forecast, early dialogue with airports is the most efficient
GIG (Rio de Janeiro)
way to prepare the compatibility through master planning. Organisations (ACI, IATA,
GRU (Sao Paulo) IIWG…) allow a sound and mutually beneficial dialogue with world airports.
It is important to identify the airport’s type of operation, as the requirements will be
BHX (Birmingham)
different if the airport is the destination, the primary alternate, the diversion, the
en-route or the emergency airport.
TPE (Taipei)
VIE (Vienna) Preparing an airport for the A380 can be quite simple, with a short lead time.
BHX (Birmingham) built an operational plan approved by the CAA UK, identified an
ORD (Chicago) A380 gate and upgraded it with a third Passenger Boarding Bridge (PBB) in less than
a year. It also bought already-used equipment from LHR (London Heathrow), which
BOS (Boston) was key in reducing the lead time.
GLOSSARY
ACI: Airports Council International
CAA: Civil Aviation Authority
IATA: International Air Transport Association
ICAO: International Civil Aviation Organization
IIWG: International Industry Working Group
The solution for airlines and airports
Smooth integration into airport operations
For an airport to become A380 compatible, a number of regulations must be taken
into account. The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) is the global aviation
rule-maker.
When studying an airport’s compatibility, these main areas are covered: airside,
pavement, Turnaround Time (TAT) and Ground Support Equipment (GSE).
Airside
The airside refers to the area of the airport where the aircraft is in movement.
Different points are checked:
• Runway and taxiway compatibility is interfacing with the aircraft which includes
performance on a given runway length
• Main landing gear width vs runway or taxiway widths
• Engine position vs runway or taxiway shoulder widths
• Wing span vs runway or taxiway separations
• Landing gear span and base vs runway turn pads and taxiway turns
Pavement (weight & landing gear)
The airport pavement loading characterisation is driven by the well-established ICAO
ACN/PCN* method, which will be updated by 2020. The new method will be based
on the Cumulative Damage Factor concept and Equivalent Single Wheel Loading,
supported with significant testing achieved in the USA (National Airport Pavement Test
Programme) and in France (A380 Pavement Experimental Programme), since the 1990’s.
Due to its main landing gear layout, the A380 is unique in terms of cumulative pave-
ment loading. Body gear stresses are cumulated with single-aisle aircraft main gear
tracks and wing gear stresses are further outboard of widebody main gear tracks.
A380 ACN values on flexible and rigid pavements are comparable to those of smaller
widebodies despite the A380’s higher Maximum Take Off Weight. They are also below
ACN values of the B777-300ER, which is the pavement sizing aircraft.
*ACN Aircraft Classification Number
PCN Pavement Classification Number
Turnaround Time & Ground Support Equipment
(Aircraft cabin & door distribution)
The aircraft performance on ground (time and costs) is dependent on the aircraft’s
size, door and service panel distribution, cabin layout, GSE availability and local
specifics. The A380 is capable of a Turnaround Time of less than 90 minutes, as the
cabin configuration and GSE staging and sequencing (catering vehicles and passenger
boarding bridges in particular) allows for optimum ground handling and servicing.
It is the only aircraft where the two cabin levels can be treated separately.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
81
ROPS BTV
Runway Overrun Prevention System (ROPS) is a safety feature Brake to Vacate (BTV) has been designed to optimise braking
which alerts the pilots to the risk of runway overrun, and if efficiency and runway turn-around time, thereby improving traffic
necessary, provides active protection. ROPS, an innovation flow and congestion. BTV technology allows pilots to select the
introduced with the A380, continuously monitors an aircraft’s appropriate runway exit during the approach to landing.
position and calculates the distance needed to safely stop on It also regulates the aircraft’s deceleration after touchdown,
the runway in dry and wet conditions. If the determined enabling it to reach any chosen exit at the correct speed under
stopping distance is longer than the available runway length, the optimum conditions, regardless of the weather and visibility.
ROPS triggers visual and oral alerts.
The solution for airlines and airports
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
91
Aircraft parameters to consider
for airport compatibility:
• Aircraft span vs runway and taxiway separations
• Aircraft length vs runway turn pads and taxiway turns and stand lengths
• Tail height vs hangars and Obstacle Limitation Surfaces (OLS)
• Aircraft Classification Number (ACN) vs Pavement Classification Number (PCN)
• Available Ground Support Equipment vs aircraft servicing requirements
(electricity, air, water fuel, passenger and cargo handling, towing…)
• Rescue and Fire Fighting (RFF) capability
• Shortage of contact stands vs remote stands
• Local environmental pressure vs aircraft noise and emission performance
Excellent noise performance
Noise performance is an important factor for airports which need to take into consider-
ation local populations. Airports and their neighbours have welcomed the outstanding
low noise performance of the A380.
The high-lift system, helped by very large wingspan and state-of-the-art engines,
allows the A380 to quickly gain altitude thereby reducing perceived noise at ground
level. The A380 was the first aircraft to be certified at a Maximum Take-Off Weight
(MTOW) of more than 400 tonnes with a cumulative noise level of 27 EPNdB* below
ICAO Chapter 3.
The Noise Abatement Departure Procedure (NADP) enables the reduction of flyover
noise over sensitive areas. The diagram below illustrates the noise footprint of the
A380-800 as recorded by local noise abatement associations during the first A380
demo flight, compared to the B747-400.
*EPNdB: Effective Perceived Noise level in decibels
A380: half the noise with 60% more passengers
A380: half the noise...
B747-400 A380-800 Runway
85dB(A)
...with 60% more passengers
noise contour
B747-400
85dB(A)
noise contour
A380-800
Runway
Optimising wake vortex separations at airports
ICAO separations
The A380 stands in its own category in ICAO recommendations for wake vortex The four ICAO categories
separations. It is important for airports to be aware that, despite the A380’s size, and the wake vortex separations
the wake vortex separation is no more than 1NM additional separation distance
compared to other widebodies. Often the perception is that the A380 is adding Follower A380
Heavy Medium Light
2 NM of separation distance compared to other widebodies. -800
Leader
However, this is only looking at the separation to a follower of the A380; in actual
fact there is a positive effect of the A380 on separations to aircraft flying in front of it. A380-800 6 NM 7 NM 8 NM
In the ICAO separations standard set in 2008, the A380 is put in a new ‘Super
Heavy’ category which imposes an extra 2 NM separation to any follower compared Heavy
to if the A380 had remained in the ‘Heavy’ category (B767, B777-300ER or B747-8). MTOM 4 NM 5 NM 6 NM
≥ 136 tonnes
As the A380’s traffic share increases, some airports feel that their capacity (in terms Medium
of passengers and/or aircraft movements) is penalised. However, this perception MTOM 5 NM
<136 tonnes
can be counterbalanced by two facts as illustrated below: ≥ 7 tonnes
Light
• The A380 can fly +1 NM closer to any ‘Heavy’ MTOM
category aircraft flying ahead. < 7 tonnes
This means that the overall string length of 2 ‘Heavy’ aircraft with an A380
in the middle is only +1 NM longer than a string of three ‘Heavy’ aircraft.
This is illustrated in the ICAO table to the right.
• The A380 has a higher capacity than other aircraft.
It offers over 70% more seats than a B777-300ER. In a sequence of three
B777-300ERs, for example, the middle one could be replaced by an A380.
While the overall string separation distance would only increase by 1 NM,
the overall capacity of the string would increase by 26%.
ICAO 6 NM 3 NM 1154 seats (+26%)
+1 NM
Base: 3 consecutive
B777-300 flights
RECAT-EU 4 NM 3 NM 1154 seats (+26%)
-1 NM
ICAO 4 NM 4 NM 915 seats
RECAT-EU allows A380 insertion with shorter
ICAO 6 NM 3 NM 1154 seats (+26%) separation by 1 NM while bringing 26% more seats
+1 NM
B777-300: 305 seats in 3-class configuration
A380: 544 seats in 4-class configuration
London Heathrow Airport, while following the ICAO separation rules, declared to
Bloomberg on 13 January 2014 that, ‘the airport added 2.4 million passengers in 2013
as airlines eked out seats by operating bigger planes including the Airbus A380’.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
02
The solution for airlines and airports
An empty cell means ‘Minimum Radar Separation’
which can be as little as 3 NM.
MTOM: Maximum Take-Off Mass
NM: Nautical Miles
The solution for airlines and airports
RECAT-EU* separations *RECAT-EU: re-categorisation by Eurocontrol
of ICAO wake turbulence longitudinal separation
While most airports follow ICAO recommendations published in 2008, other separation minima on approach and departure
standards have since been approved by regional airworthiness authorities which offer
reduced separations. In 2014, EASA certified the RECAT-EU standard which is more
advantageous for the A380 as well as other aircraft types. Airlines are encouraged to The future
promote this concept to airports and to their national authorities. The EASA-approved
Eurocontrol safety case can be used to approve RECAT-EU locally in any country. at ICAO level
Eurocontrol obtained RECAT-EU certification after additional wake vortex in-flight
measurements helped demonstrate that the A380 could reduce its wake vortex ICAO recommendations are
separations. With its 6 aircraft categories, RECAT-EU offers a more optimum set of expected to be revised, taking
separation rules compared to the 4 ICAO categories. For example, an aircraft in the into account any reduced
RECAT-EU ‘Upper Heavy’ category such as the B777-300ER or B747-8 will be able separations which have been
to get as much as 2NM closer to the A380 compared to the ICAO rules. When an certified since 2008 such as
A380 is put in between two B777-300ERs, the overall string length is actually 1NM RECAT-EU and RECAT-US which
shorter than three B777-300ERs behind one another in the ICAO rules, while still both offer reduced separations.
offering 26% more seats. This is illustrated below. Common values need to be
identified, in particular for the A380.
Another illustration of a RECAT-EU benefit is the A380’s seamless integration into
It is in the interest of all stakeholders,
A320/B737 traffic which offers 38% more capacity to the overall string of aircraft.
airlines, airports and civil aviation
Many airports are converting or are considering converting to the RECAT-EU separation
authorities that ICAO recommenda-
standards. Paris Charles De Gaulle implemented RECAT-EU at the end of 2015.
tions allow for more capacity
London Heathrow has started working on implementing RECAT-EU separation rules
at airports in the future.
for the A380 in its ‘Time Based Separation’. Other airports interested in evaluating
RECAT-EU implementation include Dubai, Frankfurt, Sydney and Singapore.
ICAO 6 NM 3 NM 1154 seats (+26%)
+1 NM
Base: 3 consecutive
B777-300 flights
RECAT-EU 4 NM 3 NM 1154 seats (+26%)
-1 NM
ICAO 4 NM 4 NM 915 seats
RECAT-EU allows A380 insertion with shorter
ICAO 6 NM 3 NM 1154 seats (+26%) separation by 1 NM while bringing 26% more seats
+1 NM
B777-300: 305 seats in 3-class configuration CONCLUSION
A380: 544 seats in 4-class configuration
Air traffic is growing every year and becoming more and more concentrated at megacities, 80% of which
are already congested today. Airport congestion and slot limitations are a global constraint recognised
by all in the industry, and with its bigger capacity, the A380 is clearly part of the solution.
With over 300 flights per day and 3 million passengers per month, the A380 has become a fixture at airports
around the world. Specially designed to capture the growing passenger market and to be easily integrated in
the airport operation process, the A380 is continuously opening new airport doors, and expanding its network.
More than 110 routes are operating everyday with the A380, with a regular network expansion all year long.
This is the result of the ‘working together’ concept with airports and taking into account regulations and aircraft
parameters. Adopting reduced separation standards such as RECAT-EU is key in further improving A380
capacity benefits to airports in the future.
Today an A380 takes off or lands every 3 minutes, helping with airport capacity limitation, supporting airlines
to maximize their hub efficiency and revenue, and offering passengers the best comfort in the sky.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
12
Pilots at the controls
Article by
of the
Jean-Michel ROY
Test Pilot
AIRBUS
The A380 is seen by pilots around the globe as the airliner,
creating envy anytime they see one taxiing ahead.
FAST magazine opens the A380’s cockpit door to find out what
the pilots actually think of this aircraft.
A chance to discover how innovation and commonality with the
existing Airbus fly-by-wire family are the pillars of its design.
Fly (F)
F1: The side sticks deliver the pilot commands to F4: The Primary Flight Display (PFD) monitors
the Flight Control Computers, part of the Fly-By- the aircraft’s attitude (pitch and roll) as well as
Wire (FBW) architecture, in manual flight. In line air data (altitude and airspeed) and flight mode
with flight control laws, surfaces respond to the annunciator (displays automation mode informa-
pilots’ commands. tion). On the A380’s screens, which are larger
compared to older aircraft, the aircraft configura-
F2: The flap lever controls the aircraft configura-
tion indicator (slats/flaps/landing gear) is also
tion for take-off and landing.
displayed.
F3: The pitch trim control switch. The A380, like
F5: The engine thrust levers control thrust on
all other FBW aircraft, is a stable platform. In
all four engines. As on all FBW aircraft, they are
normal law, an automatic trim function reduces
normally set in a notch defining the maximum
pilot workload during speed and configuration
thrust available and the autothrust will regulate
changes. On the A380, pitch trim is fully electrical
according to the flight phase (climb thrust in
including back-up (no more mechanical trim
climb, speed control in cruise, idle in descent).
wheels). At engine start, the trim is automatically
If the pilot wishes, they can take the levers out of
set according to where the aircraft’s centre of
the notch and fly the thrust manually. On landing,
gravity is located.
two reversers are available on the inner engines.
F6: The Auto Flight System control panel allows
the crew to provide short-term commands to
the Auto Flight System (Flight Director, Autopilot,
Autothrust) like heading change, altitude change
or speed change.
Navigate (N)
N1: The Navigation Display (ND) is the extra large screen that not only displays the aircraft’s position
on a map, but also displays its altitude, improving pilots’ situational awareness relative to terrain
and weather. On the ground, it is possible to display aircraft position on the airport map, increasing
pilot situational awareness at big airports especially in poor weather conditions.
N2: The Flight Management System (FMS) used for overall flight strategy is now controlled on
a large screen, identical to the PFD and ND, allowing increased readability as well as improved
reconfiguration capability. Pilots may interact with the FMS (along with the ND and mailbox) via a
keyboard and track ball.
N3: Brake to Vacate (BTV) is a new auto-brake function allowing runway occupancy time to be
optimised while reducing brake wear and improving passenger comfort. This function is associated
with runway overrun protections, offering enhanced safety and efficiency for landing (see ROPS
article FAST #55).
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
22
Pilots at the controls of the A380
S1
F6
F4 N1
N3
S2
M1
S3
N2
C2
F1
F5
C1
F2
F3
Communicate (C) Manage systems (S) Manage mission (M)
C1: The integrated radio S1: The overhead panel brings together the aircraft system M1: The Onboard Information
management panel allows control panels for air conditioning, electrical, fuel and hydraulic System (OIS) eases access
easier management of voice systems, for example. The dark cockpit environment allows to operational information,
communications. easy checking that the aircraft is ready to fly (no white lights). reducing pilot workload and
the quantity of paper in the
C2: The mailbox allows S2: The warning display shows the different checklists, both cockpit. It replaces paper
interactive management in normal operation and in abnormal or emergency situations.
documents with electronic
of the datalink between
ones, quickening information
S3: The system display offers schematic views of systems the aircraft and the ground
searches and updates to the
relevant to the current flight phase. For example, in normal
Air Traffic Control.
operations manuals, navi-
operation, it displays the door page at the gate, the engine
gation charts, performance
page during engine start and the wheel page during taxiing.
computations for take-off,
In the event of a system failure, it presents the relevant page.
en route and landing, etc.
Cameras relay real-time video of parts of the aircraft
(e.g. cockpit door).
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
32
A380 versatility
by Abbas SHABAN
Captain with Emirates
The A380 is a versatile aircraft which provides Emirates with an opportunity to
deliver a unique customer experience. The aircraft’s real estate allows us to offer
features such as our onboard spa and lounge which tend to be very well received by
our customers and are also key revenue drivers.
The Emirates A380s provide a strong revenue potential on trunk routes with strong
demand for premium classes and the large economy cabin in the aircraft helps lower
commercial risk by covering operational and fixed costs.
One of the other important factors about the A380 that improves the overall
customer experience is the reduced noise levels inside the cabin when compared to
other widebody aircraft.
Despite being a large aircraft, the A380 has outstanding performance capabilities
requiring a shorter runway length for take-off and landing compared to other widebody
aircraft. It can take off with an overall weight of 575,000 kg and at temperatures
up to 45°C. This gives us the flexibility to schedule A380 departures at any
time of the day including baking afternoon missions in peak summer! The A380 is
also very importantly one of the most environmentally-friendly aircraft with excellent
noise and emission characteristics.
Accomplishing business targets
In terms of customer engagement the A380 helps Emirates offer a superior product
that works like a crowd-puller.
Operationally, the large widebody capacity offered by the A380 is a critical part of
Emirates’ strategy to optimise operations to congested airports. The A380’s payload
range means that it is capable of the longest hauls on the Emirates network.
For example, Emirates will soon be operating non-stop flights from Dubai to Auckland
- a flight time of almost 18 hours!
Adaptability to different route types
The versatility of the A380 allows Emirates to operate different combinations of
payload and range to meet the diverse route requirements on the Emirates network.
For example, Emirates uses the A380 on short flights from Dubai to Jeddah, Kuwait,
on medium-range flights to various destinations in Europe and on ultra long range
flights to destinations in the USA, Australasia and so on. Emirates’ strategy primarily
revolves around using the A380 for trunk demand on mature routes which could be
short, medium or long-haul and it works best in our network when trunk routes feed
other trunk routes.
However, there are certain factors especially related to airport infrastructure that
make the deployment of the A380 on certain routes fairly difficult. These include the
limited number of new airports that are compatible to operating an A380 and the
challenges around development of airport compatibility for secondary airports.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
42
Pilots at the controls of the A380
A380 technologies
by Jacques VERRIERE
Captain with Air France
Air France’s pilots were already familiar with technologies such as Flight Management
System (FMS) and fly-by-wire, but in the A380 cockpit, we found improved human-
machine interfaces (FMS is one example) as well as several new technologies.
The most visible feature in our cockpits is the dual Head-Up Display (HUD) installation.
Some other technologies are less visible but still important for safety. For the first time,
we flew an aircraft equipped with Brake To Vacate (BTV) and Runway Overrun Prevention
System (ROPS), as well as auto TCAS (Traffic Collision Avoidance System).
The A380 entry-into-service was also an opportunity to switch from paper manuals
to electronic FCOM (Flight Crew Operating Manual), MEL (Minimum Equipment List),
and to get rid of some older technologies such as ADF (Automatic Direction Finder)
despite some regulatory hurdles that we had to overcome. As pilots, we consider
the A380 is the first aircraft of the 21st century.
HUD rationale
Since the 1970’s, HUD installation on civil aircraft had been the subject of heated
debate among airline pilots: some considered HUD as the ultimate tool, others
considered it as useless. When Airbus offered single or dual HUD as an option on
A380s, we took this opportunity to assess its advantages. For an aircraft such as
the A380, as well as all other Airbus aircraft, HUD does not improve the operational
capabilities in terms of minima, so the only factor to consider was safety.
We examined the causes of a string of several approach and landing incidents and
accidents and found that a large percentage were caused by destabilization in short
final (wind shears, wind shifts in direction) sometimes associated with poor visibility.
We considered that one of the advantages of HUD is the enhanced detections of
such destabilizing factors and its installation would improve safety.
Two-HUD advantage
Air Alaska introduced HUDs on its B727 fleet after a season marked by many
flight cancellations at its Seattle base due to foggy weather. At this time, it was the
only practical way to improve minima on aircraft using older technology.
Several earlier generation civil aircraft, as well as some business and regional jets,
are equipped with HUDs to allow CAT3B operations with autoflight systems that
are not certified as fail operative. In CAT3 operations, with specific task-sharing
(captain flying head-up and first officer monitoring head-down), a single HUD
in captain position, is a logical choice. Our goal was to use HUD for enhanced
situation awareness in order to improve safety mainly in approach and landing.
We now know that this task-sharing known as Pilot Monitoring (formerly Pilot Not
Flying) is safest when both pilots have access to the same information via dual HUDs.
Our position seemed to be quite isolated a decade ago (FEDEX was also a noticeable
exception), but now we feel comforted by the fact that both main airplane manu -
facturers offer dual HUDs as the only option (or as basic configuration) on their
newer aircraft.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
52
Pilots at the controls of the A380
Moving to an A380
by Alan CHAN
Divisional Vice President Training Singapore Airlines
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
62
Pilots at the controls of the A380
Prior to the Entry-Into-Service (EIS) of the A380, SIA detached two senior instructor
pilots for two years with Airbus to help define some of the human-machine interface
and technical aspects of the flight deck. We gained much in the area of technical
co-operation with the Airbus project team, which assisted us tremendously in our EIS.
Transitioning pilots to the A380
One of our considerations was whether there was a need for the initial pilots on the
A380 to have Airbus fly-by-wire experience, as we had a mix from the B747-400, B777
and A340-500, with the majority from the B747-400. We concluded that there was no
necessity.
Our B747-400 pilots had coped well with the technical complexity of the A380 flight
deck, albeit with a little help in the way of technical briefings along the way. There were
some issues initially with regard to negative operational transfers from the B747-400:
undesired outcomes resulting from uncalled for fuel-balancing, misunderstanding of
the lower severity level of hydraulic system failures compared to the B747-400, and
lack of appreciation of the effects of normal and flare law during landing phase.
These were quickly overcome with technical briefings conducted early into our EIS.
Pilots from the A340-500 had their fair share of issues, albeit different from those
encountered by the B747-400 pilots.
Operating the A380
A process to dispatch the aircraft with less redundancy than that approved by the
MMEL was set up. It was not easy initially since it involved regulatory approvals,
but close cooperation between SIA and Airbus in working with our local authorities
ensured that we were able to minimise instances of AOG. There were other technical
issues that necessitated long-term rectifications, some of which are still on-going.
One of the more challenging aspects of the A380 is the availability of alternates that
will permit an A380 to land and be dispatched, both en-route and destination alternates.
Various restrictions in the airport manoeuvring area add to the complexity for pilots.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
72
Pilots at the controls of the A380
CONCLUSION
For example, in an airport in China, the only available runway for low
visibility operations is not approved for A380 operations, and this
Versatility, innovation and commonality
results in delays and dispatch difficulties.
are key features that pilots appreciate
One of the beauties of the performance capability of the A380 is its
about the A380.
ability to cruise at a higher initial altitude than the B747-400, even at
maximum take-off weight. This has given us a tremendous advantage Indeed, the A380 adapts to different
in securing an appropriate initial altitude on our long-haul flights from route requirements in terms of payload
Singapore to Europe. The A380 also has the advantage of not being and range, offers new or improved
limited by routes over high terrain when compared to a twin. technologies which facilitate flying and
contribute to safety and integrates the
existing Airbus fly-by-wire family.
Feeling the difference
Transition to the A380 from other Airbus families was relatively easy
and seamless. It is certainly not difficult, nor can one say that it is easy
to fly an A380. The A380 feels very much like the other fly-by-wire
aircraft in the Airbus families, yet it is also quite different. It appears
to be slower than the A330, but faster than the A340-500.
Nevertheless, the A380 is a beauty to fly. I love its handling quality.
It is gracious in flight and rides well in turbulent conditions.
For all its size and slowness, it flies well and is a joy to manoeuvre.
One is amazed at the approach speed, wondering if it is at all a big jet.
I had flown the A330 and A340-500. To me, the A330 is very
responsive and sporty with a unique landing profile.
The A340-500 is slower and not quite as sporty as its smaller
sibling. My colleagues tell me the A350 handles well.
The A380 is like none of the above. It is the only one
of its kind and now rules the skies.
MMEL: Master Minimum Equipment List
AOG: Aircraft On Ground
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
82
Passenger experience
Passengers love the A380. Over 120 million passengers have already
enjoyed the unique experience of flying aboard this aircraft.
What is new today is that passenger experience is becoming a
criterion for choice. Passengers are increasingly informed about
the details of their upcoming flight via the websites where they book.
People are becoming more aware that passenger experience
and comfort might differ from one aircraft type to another.
What was initially a simple characteristic of the A380 is turning into
a major and distinct advantage over the competition.
Article by
Gabriel HANOT
Airline Marketing Manager
AIRBUS
gabriel.hanot@airbus.com
Passenger experience
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
92
A unique flight
The A380 has become part of world aviation history. Passengers recognise the
A380 with its unique shape and size. And they also recognise it when they fly it.
According to a recent survey by the independent agency Epinion, almost twice as
many passengers (66%) recognise the aircraft type when they fly on an A380,
compared to passengers flying on another aircraft.
Passengers recognising the aircraft type after the flight
0P%asseng1e0%rs recog20n%ising th30e% aircraf4t0 %type aft5e0%r the flig60h%t 70%
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70%
A380 66%
A380 66%
B777 35%
B777 35%
B787 35%
B787 35%
The A380’s differentiation is a real competitive advantage for an airline compared
to other aircraft, as an enjoyable flight will not only be attributed to the A380 but also
to the airline itself.
The A380 is highly popular among the general public. This is most visible on the
web and social media where the A380 is the most mentioned aircraft. Being popular
on the web is a key advantage for the A380 and its operators, given that 85% of
passengers today book their flights online (source: Epinion).
High passenger satisfaction
Flying aboard the A380 is not only different, but is also very satisfying.
In the Epinion survey, passengers rated their experience on a scale from 1 to 10.
The result is quite clear: the A380 is rated better than any other aircraft type,
in all classes, including economy. Results are similar even when comparing aircraft
Average passenger recommendation, from 1 to 10
within the same airline or aircraft on the same routes.
6A.0verage pa6.s5senger re7c.0ommenda7t.i5on, from 18 .t0o 10 8.5 9.0
First class 6.0 6.5 7.0 7.5 8.0 8.5 A39.800
B777
A380
First class
B777
Business class
Business class
Premium economy class
Premium economy class
Economy class
Economy class
This high satisfaction rate can be explained by the high-end experience offered by
the A380, being more spacious, more comfortable and quieter than other aircraft;
but also by the airlines’ on-board offer. Airlines have understood this marketing
potential and use the A380’s image to market their own brand.
Passenger experience
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
03
Advertising stimulates demand and there is a huge demand from passengers to fly
on the A380. The Epinion survey identified that 60% of passengers who have
already experienced the A380 are ready to make an extra effort to fly on an A380
for their next long-haul flight. 60%
What does making an effort mean?
• 20% of the passengers said they are ready to pay a bit more – 100 USD
on average - for a return trip on the A380
• The remaining 40% of passengers would take a less convenient flight: of passengers are ready
additional connection, less convenient time of the day, longer connecting time,
or even an airline they don’t know – only to make sure they fly on an A380 to make an extra effort
Overall, this extra effort means more revenue for the A380 operators. to fly the A380
Passenger experience
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
13
Increasing customer awareness
According to the Epinion survey, 24% of A380 passengers specifically selected this
aircraft type when they were looking for their flight tickets.
As travellers become more aware of aircraft type, the number of ‘A380-friendly’
passengers is growing and is stimulating demand for A380 flights.
Airbus has introduced the first ever A380-specific booking assistant, so passengers
can easily find A380 flights (see overleaf).
Customer awareness has been growing in all industries, as more and more
information on the product is now available to the consumer. People are looking
increasingly at product characteristics and satisfaction, and not just at the price.
The trend towards more consumer awareness, that started in the hotel and
restaurant industries with websites such as booking.com or tripadvisor, is now
happening in the world of flight retailers.
Some websites are pioneering this area such as Routehappy. A flight ticket is no
longer displayed as a simple combination of fare and schedule, but as a whole
product with characteristics, pictures and even videos.
With this new way of distributing flights, air transport is no longer just a simple
commodity, and this can actually turn into an opportunity for airlines.
60% Websites are giving more and more details about flights, such as seat comfort,
air quality, connectivity and entertainment systems. More awareness on these topics
means more opportunities for airlines to value the passenger experience they offer.
Consumers are now able to look at the level of the passenger experience when they
choose a flight. This new environment will stimulate more and more the demand for
A380 flights that offer unrivalled passenger experience.
CONCLUSION
Independent surveys show that the A380 is the passengers’ preferred aircraft.
Passengers now have the choice to fly on an A380 or on another aircraft type thanks to websites
such as iflyA380.com. The A380’s key assets, its differentiation and its unrivalled positive customer
feedback, are giving the A380 operators a clear advantage over the competition.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
23
Promoting and booking via
iflyA380.com
To respond to increasing demand from consumers
to fly the A380 and to spread even more awareness about this unique
aircraft, Airbus has developed the first ever A380 booking assistant,
iflyA380.com. In this website, travellers can discover all A380
destinations, all A380 airline offers, read feedback posted by A380
passengers and find and book A380 flights.
The aim of iflyA380.com is to help A380 passengers find their next A380 flight.
It also aims to create more awareness amongst a wider audience, to help
consumers learn about the aircraft type and its associated benefits.
These potential passengers go through phases of inspiration and research
before they book. Given that 70% of them do not actually know where they
want to go when first looking for a trip, (*Google/Ipsos MediaCT), iflyA380.com
aims at inspiring them.
Passenger experience
noitide
laicepS
083A
TSAF
33
The website includes details about the A380, about the airlines
operating it and the destinations.
The A380 becomes an integral part of the journey, offering a unique
travelling experience, unbeatable levels of comfort and distinctive
on-board services and all before travellers even reach their destination.
In addition to displaying A380 characteristics and destinations, the
website enables each airline to showcase its cabin and on-board
services. A380 passenger comments from social media provide
convincing feedback to encourage travellers to try the experience
for themselves.
iflyA380.com is a real means to attract travellers. The website not only
highlights how the A380 contributes to the passengers’ flight
experience, it can also influence booking decisions by triggering positive
emotions and it has already started to prove efficient with some first
bookings that have come directly through iflyA380.com.
Ensuring the best
cabins
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
43
The cabin experience has increasingly become a major Article by (left to right)
differentiator for travellers. The A380 cabin frequently
Ralph GERSTNER
leaves a favourable impression on those who have Head of A380 Cabin Customisation
AIRBUS
flown in it. This positive level of passenger satisfaction
ralph.gerstner@airbus.com
has been achieved by working hand-in-hand with airlines
Alain DE BOECK
to create the most comfortable travel experience, that
A380 Cabin Customisation Manager
satisfies their expectations and at the same time respects AIRBUS
alain.de-boeck@airbus.com
airworthiness regulations as well as operational, technical
and industrial constraints.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
53
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
Tailoring the A380 cabin
to customer needs
Airbus explains the A380 baseline offer and reviews it with the customer.
Proven, in-service solutions may be integrated, which comply with the required
lead time. To facilitate the complex task, Airbus supports the customer definition
team in a close and robust partnership providing knowledge and skills built up on
customisation experience.
The optimum cabin arrangement is very specific to an airline and usually the result
of several iterations. The type of classes (first - business - premium economy -
economy) with the required number of seats per class and spacing between seats
are an essential input as a first step. Secondly, the airline defines cabin service needs
such as galley space, the number of lavatories and required space for stowage.
The current trend is for operators to place the first, business and premium economy
classes on the upper deck, while configuring the main deck for an all-economy layout
in a 10-abreast (3-4-3) or 11-abreast (3-5-3) seating configuration, thereby keeping
Airbus’ standard 18-inch width between armrests. However, to maximise versatility,
the main deck’s seating in constant cross-section can be configured in a 4, 6, 7, 8,
10 and 11-abreast (9 also possible by adding a seat rail) and the upper deck’s seating
in a 4, 6, 7 and 8-abreast.
Standard A380 cabin Based on the above, the cabin takes into account technical feasible solutions, lead
time for development of specific arrangements and airworthiness regulations. The
• 544 passengers
remaining fine-tuning is about balancing those key factors while meeting cost and
• 4 classes weight targets.
• Front and rear staircase
Following the cabin arrangement, cabin systems are determined such as integrated
• 1 trolley lift
In-Flight Entertainment (IFE) and/or connectivity to access internet, live TV and phone
• 18 lavatories services. Customers can customise lighting by choosing from a variety of colour and
• 20 galleys intensity options provided by Cabin LED Units (CLEDU), and can decide on visual
• 19 cabin attendant seats projections such as logos and patterns.
3D designs
and virtual reality
New technologies, implemented by
Airbus throughout the cabin definition
process, facilitate the customer’s
decisions and speed up the process.
As customers can visualise their cabin
and requested customisations via
3D designs, the level of feasibility
and accuracy of the customised
cabin is greatly increased.
Virtual cabin reviews mean that
customers can start planning
on-board and cabin crew activities.
Thanks to these technologies,
Airbus can take earlier corrective
actions to help reduce costs
and lead time.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
63
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
Meeting regulatory, operational
and comfort requirements
Airbus carries out investigations, based on requirements, so that the
cabin is compliant with airworthiness and operational regulations.
These investigations cover a wide variety of subjects.
Evacuation
The A380’s flexibility means that many cabin configurations can be installed,
although they must all strictly respect airworthiness authorities’ requirements
and safety measures. Airbus ensures that the customised cabin complies with
these criteria.
Passengers must be uniformly distributed in each zone so as to comply with the
evacuation plan. Currently the maximum number of passengers in an A380 is
853 as agreed with the airworthiness authorities. To comply with the emergency
evacuation requirements, all passengers and crew must be able to leave the
aircraft cabin within 90 seconds.
Oxygen masks
All cabin occupants must be able to see and reach their oxygen mask in case
of emergency depressurisation of the cabin. In this investigation, Airbus must
demonstrate that all occupants can reach an oxygen mask when seated in any
position, with the seat belt fastened or not.
The quantity of masks must exceed the maximum allowable occupants in the
dedicated area by at least 10%. Mask drop lengths and reachability are studied
by using anthropometrical human models and 3D geometry in compliance with
airworthiness authorities’ rules.
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
73
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
83
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
Quieter cabins
The A380 is renowned for its quiet cabin. However, Airbus offers support to customers
who wish to further reduce the noise levels in specific areas.
In complex cases, Airbus offers a cabin mock-up acoustic lab to simulate cabin noise
scenarios so that customers can perceive the impact of certain modifi cations and
decide if it is worth the investment in the cabin change.
One example of how Airbus and an airline worked together on an acoustic investigation
was the project to install a quiet passenger bedroom in the front of the upper deck.
The chosen location was particularly challenging as the head wall of the bedroom was
planned to be against the avionic system compartment and close to the main front
staircase. In a standard cabin configuration, this space is usually occupied by a
lavatory, which requires much less noise reduction.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
93
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
The Airbus design office and the supplier worked in close cooperation to provide
a design to the Airbus interior noise department for analysis. Different insulation
scenarios were tested via the lab, the final recommendation being to implement
an optimised balance of secondary insulation and wall-panel performance.
After more studies to prevent noise leakage through the doors, as well as service and
rapid decompression flaps, Airbus validated the final design in flight test. The objective
of having a reduced background noise level between the first class and the bedroom
was achieved with a noticeable decrease of the sound pressure level.
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
04
Cabin ventilation
Optimal cabin ventilation must be ensured for passenger comfort, In addition to the ventilation system and representing the
but also to ensure that the cabin complies with regulations. The biggest effort in the ventilation customisation process is the
thermal condition within an aircraft cabin is affected by external cabin air extraction system (CAX), which extracts heat and
factors such as the outside temperature and solar radiation, and odours from galley and lavatory areas. Another key element
by internal factors such as passenger density, heat emission from is the passenger individual air distribution system with
in-flight entertainment, lights or galley equipment. Regulations also adjustable air nozzles above the passenger’s head to regulate
impact thermal condition as they require a certain amount of fresh individual air supply.
outside air to ensure adequate oxygen levels.
In complex cabin configurations, further studies may also be
To reach this goal in view of varying aircraft configurations, many needed. In these cases, CFD (Computational Fluid Dynamics)
particular adaptations are implemented into a new cabin design, calculations are performed to analyse the behaviour of the air
taking the original cabin layout from the customer as definition flow and the ventilation performance. The main advantage of
basis. The A380 passenger cabin is divided into 15 temperature CFD simulation is that design changes can be implemented
zones, 8 for the main deck and 7 for the upper deck. Every new much faster into a virtual model than in a mock-up. Each area
seat class arrangement within these zones is analysed to can be analysed in detail by cutting the model in different
determine whether modifications are required to obtain optimal planes and directions.
thermal comfort for passengers. Further determining factors, for
In some cases though, a combination of CFD analysis and
example the overhead stowage concept and monument
mock-ups can be used to confirm results. To study cabin
installations, have an impact on the type of air outlets chosen for
airflow velocity, helium bubbles are injected into the air supply
every position within the cabin. For an A380 cabin, up to 270 air
that can be visualised using specific filming techniques.
outlets are installed, for which the airflow is regulated by up to 425
restrictors that are installed inside the air supply ducting and need
to be calculated for each customised cabin.
Volumetric flow=15 litres/second Volumetric flow=20 litres/second
Helium bubble test showing direction and velocity of airstream in the cabin
CONCLUSION
Interpreting the customer’s vision requires close collaboration between the customer, Airbus and equipment
suppliers. Key steps include optimising the design and ensuring compliance with certification requirements,
while respecting cost and lead time targets.
The whole process is supported by 3D design, virtual reality and full-scale mock-ups to achieve
one of the quietest and most spacious cabins in civil aviation.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
14
Ensuring the best A380 cabins
Maintainability of equipment
Airbus applies a basic rule of 15 minutes maximum to replace
a Line Replaceable Unit (LRU). Specific investigations are launched
when a cabin element physically covers an LRU.
An example of this is the cabin air recirculation filters, located in
the aircraft sidewall on the upper deck. For maintenance purposes,
these units must have sufficient replacement accessibility.
However, commodities such as personal storage areas in first or
business class seats may be placed partially or totally in front of such
units. When access to units is not feasible via the commodities, specific
split air filters may be recommended during customer guidance phase.
Investigations can either take place via virtual reality or by creating
a mock-up, for more complicated setups.
Volumetric flow=25 litres/second
Innovative systems
and aircraft design
Designed to ensure the highest technical and commercial
performances, the A380 entered into service with the
most efficient technologies of the moment. In many
cases, Airbus developed new technology, proving the
A380 as an innovation driver that cleared systems for
aircraft such as the A350 XWB.
Article by
A programme plane however, always remains in evolution
Marc GUINOT
and innovations continue to be implemented long after
Former A380 Chief Engineer
AIRBUS its entry-into-service, strengthening its position as the
world’s largest and most technologically advanced
Contact for additional information
passenger aircraft.
Joachim COLBERG
A380 Engineering
AIRBUS This continuous improvement cycle is not about to stop.
joachim.colberg@airbus.com
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
24
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
34
Innovative systems and aircraft design
Setting the highest safety standards
Innovation evolutions Future innovations
Monitoring of vertical load factor TCAS (Traffic Collision Avoidance Manual protections for autopilot
and Angle of Attack (AoA) System) operation
In order to improve AoA monitoring in Autopilot/Flight Director TCAS (AP/FD Current flight control practice is to
case of multiple icing, a specific function TCAS) mode combines the Autopilot disconnect autopilot when entering
makes a correlation between load factor (automatic mode), Flight Director too deep into flight control protection
increase and AoA increase. Load factor (manual mode) and the TCAS to pro- domain. To improve safety and help
is representative of the aircraft’s dynamic vide a vertical speed guidance based pilots during severe events, autopilot
behaviour and should be coherent with on optimum avoidance manoeuvre will be kept engaged and continue
AoA evolution. If AoA behaviour is not in in case of conflicting air traffic (TCAS working, taking into account the same
line with the load factor, it is disregarded, Resolution Advisory (RA)). protections as manual flight.
as icing is suspected. It avoids or reduces pilot overreaction,
enhances safety and increases pilot New Air and Inertia Automatic Data
comfort. Switching (NAIADS)
Runway Overrun Protection System
The aim of the TCAS Alert Prevention This solution automatically displays
(ROPS) and Brake to Vacate (BTV)
(TCAP) is to reduce the number of best air and inertial data. It also provides
Available since 2009 for both dry and undesired TCAS RA occurring during backup airspeed and altitude from
wet runway states, ROPS is an Airbus level off manoeuvre, by adapting the independent engine probes.
developed response to the growing altitude capture law. It improves These improvements will be available
occurrence of runway overrun incidents, passenger comfort, without fuel by end of 2018.
which remain the main cause of aircraft penalty for a normal operation.
accidents. Associated to it, BTV assists These systems are basic for new Flight data recovery improvements
pilots in easing airport congestion and aircraft and can be retrofitted for
To anticipate future regulation evolutions,
improves runway turnaround time. the others.
some solutions are currently proposed
Improvement is ongoing to take into
or will be proposed by end of 2019 on
account contaminated runway states.
top of the existing recorders.
Both systems are optional and can be
retrofitted. • Aircraft tracking relying on the periodic
transmission of key parameters
through ACARS network, by using
Aircraft Operational Communication
(AOC).
• The ‘deployable recorder’ will combine
recorders that can float on water and
Emergency Locator Transmitters (ELT)
to improve flight data recovery for
investigations.
Availability is expected for end of 2019.
Designing and evolving for high performance
Structure
Innovation at EIS Future innovations
The A380 already integrated new One of the most promising technologies Another design-to-cost application
technology at EIS. Its structure for increased durability is the application concerns Additive Layer Manufacturing
was based on R&T innovative of Laser Shock Peening. Laser peening (ALM), or 3D printing.
designs and benefitted from new induces exceptionally deep residual
materials such as Carbon Fibre compressive stresses to enhance the A first example of this technology used
Reinforced Polymer (CFRP) fatigue strength of critical metallic on the A380 is the mounting device for
with Intermediate Modulus fibres components. This treatment, applied iPads for the captain and first officer.
(Centre wing box and Section 19, locally, limits fatigue and crack growth. This retrofittable option will be imple-
UD beams), fuselage shells in Glare, Another technology under development mented in 2017 on the A380.
6xxx Alloys in conjunction with laser is the application of cold working in
beam welding. hybrid joints (Aluminium-Titanium, The application of riblets, a new gener-
Aluminium-CFRP). ation of coating, enables a reduction in
fuel consumption. The riblet profile
New R&T
Other developments are being studied can be engraved in the external coat.
developments via the “design-to-cost” technique. This technology applied on the upper
One innovative technology is related to skin of the wing as well as on the upper
are continuously
the application of Isogrid structures. and lower horizontal tail plane skin would
The hexagonal topology is especially enable 0.3 % Block Fuel saving.
being investigated
good for structures that are dominantly
for performance loaded by shear forces, e.g. the pylon.
Although implemented for the A350 XWB
enhancement.
on the wing rib 1, the application
foreseen for the A380 would be for
the pylon lateral panel. This technology
enables weight reduction as well as
reduced recurring costs by using thinner
raw material plates compared to
conventional stiffened structures.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
44
Innovative systems and aircraft design
Systems
Innovation at EIS Innovation evolutions
Electrical system Y* lateral law Aluminium wiring
– Variable frequency
Expanding “control per objective” Targeting weight savings, the A380 was
To simplify the electrical equipment, the philosophy to yaw axis, pedals now the first programme to introduce alumini-
heavy IDGs (Integrated Drive Genera- control sideslip instead of directly con- um wiring for approximatively 60% of the
tors), which provided fixed frequency trolling the rudder deflection. Specific total wiring length of the aircraft (close to
power to the electrical network, were sideslip probes have also been added. 500 kilometres) instead of the conven-
removed and replaced by Variable More accurate sideslip control reduc- tional copper as current conductor.
Frequency Generators (VFGs). These es lateral loads and therefore aircraft Knowing that aluminium weighs one
new generators are lighter and have weight. third of the weight of copper, 40 percent
been proven more reliable. of the conventional wiring weight has
been saved.
Load alleviation functions
The aluminium wiring technology was
Hydraulic generation at 5000 PSI
On top of the classical Manoeuver Load already used for thick cables (cross-
(Pounds per Square Inch)
Alleviation function, short period wing section of 5mm² or more). However,
Increased pressure from 3000 to 5000 structural modes are controlled or the A380 was the first aircraft to use the
PSI has enabled smaller pipes, manifolds damped by control law specific functions technology for thinner cables, under
and reservoir while still providing the using dedicated accelerometers. These 5mm², and for the connections. The new
same mechanical power. This modifi- functions act in case of turbulence wire’s conductors are made of nickel-
cation has also enabled the downsizing (Active/Passive Turbulence Alleviation) or plated, copper-clad aluminium strands
of all actuators (flight controls, high lift, in case of manoeuver (Ailerons/Rudder and a special protection has been
landing gear, doors, etc.). In addition, Waltzes). It provides passenger comfort developed for contact design to provide
the downsized hydraulic distribution as well as a significant weight reduction. a specific sealing barrier to prevent from
creates a significant weight benefit. any corrosion risks.
The outer insulation is made of improved
2H2E architecture polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tape.
Fuel transfer load alleviation A new specification was also worked out
Four totally segregated power sources
for the aluminium connectors.
Wing bending load management is a key are used: two hydraulic circuits and two
driver of aircraft weight reduction. But electrical circuits. It allows dissimilarity in
the optimum is unfortunately opposite technologies, increases redundancy and
Introduction of GLA (Gust Load
between ground and flight. To take therefore safety. Furthermore, it also
Alleviation)
benefit from both, fuel transfers are eases installation to avoid engine burst
automatically managed just after liftoff consequences as electric cables can be In case of gust, the Angle of Attack (AoA)
to create more inboard fuel loading on installed on the fuselage ceiling, whereas probes can measure the flow change at
ground and more outboard fuel loading hydraulic pipes need to run below lowest the nose of the aircraft 200 ms before it
in flight. floor. reaches the wing. Ailerons are quickly
deflected upwards and wing bending
loads are decreased when the gust
Relaxed stability EHA/EBHA finally hits the wing. This allows a weight
reduction of the wing
Specific longitudinal control laws have Together with 2H2E architecture, flight
been developed to allow flying with a control actuators include electrical
more aft center of gravity and therefore actuators (EHA) and electro-hydraulic Future innovations
reduce Horizontal Tail Plane size. actuators (EBHA).
Automatic Take-Off Compensation
Redundancies have been added in These electrical actuators are a backup
(ATOC)
particular by having a longitudinal gyro- for the hydraulic actuators in case of
meter in the Backup Control Module. failure or MEL (Minimum Equipment List) In potential future developments, a
Even further relaxed stability is being dispatch. reduction of fin size is being considered,
considered for the future. introducing an ATOC function which
will reduce opposite engine thrust during
the take-off run if an outer engine failure
occurs. This allows recovering similar
take-off performance with a smaller fin
by reducing the yaw effect of the engine
failure.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
54
Innovative systems and aircraft design
Optimising maintenance to improve availability
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
64
Innovative systems and aircraft design
Maintenance To improve A380 OA and maintenance The extension is possible thanks to:
costs, Airbus launched a project to
programme
optimise scheduled maintenance • Identification of some margins, to be
programme intervals, with the following vali dated by tests or in-service monitoring
targets:
An aircraft on ground for • An extension of A-check intervals from • A detailed assessment of in-service feed-
planned and unplanned 750FH (Flight Hours) to 1000FH back (finding/nil-finding, but also some
maintenance is not available • An increase of C-check intervals from specific requests to capture in-service
for operation and thereby is 2 to 3 years, to avoid one aircraft experience on filter clogging, drain bottle
not generating revenue. grounding over a 6-year period liquid levels, etc.)
Airbus worked with several The A-check optimisation results are ex- • A correlation of Full-Scale Fatigue Test
airlines, defining the Oper- pected to be approved by the authorities findings versus aircraft configuration
ational Availability (OA) of by the end of 2016 through the Mainte- and actual loads
an aircraft as the number of nance Review Board Report (MRBR) Re-
days per year the aircraft is vision 8, whereas the C-check optimisa- • The use of NDT (Non Destructive
not available for operation tion results will be included in the MRBR Techn iques) instead of visual inspection,
due to technical reasons. Revision 9 foreseen for March 2018. in some areas limited in size to increase
Airbus is also contributing inspection intervals
to an IATA working group This maintenance programme optimi-
to publish the definition sation covers systems, powerplant and • The introduction of some structural
of the OA. zonal inspection tasks as per the Main- modifications to improve design and
tenance Review Board (MRB) process, remove the ALI (Airworthiness Limitation
including some Certification Maintenance Item) or escalation TH/II (Threshold Interval
Requirements (CMR) tasks. It also tar- Inspection). Not all the modifications will be
gets structure inspection task alleviation retrofittable, but as an example, section
(Airworthiness Limitation Item). 19 will be free of inspection in forward fit.
The active contribution of operators to the
scheduled maintenance optimisation process
by providing actual data is a key element for
the success of the project.
Unavailability breakdown OA results: Unavailability per year - 1st cycle
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
Year
Unplanned technical grounding
ytilibaliavanu
fo
syad
fo
.bN
Unplanned
technical grounding
Checks
overrun
Unplanned
Light
Heavy
Checks
Planned Base Checks overrun
Average unavailability per year over the period
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
74
Innovative systems and aircraft design
Systems
Innovation at EIS Innovation evolutions
Easing and improving maintenance was
F/CTL – SLATS (FLAPS) WING TIP MMEL optimisation
a driver and a requirement during the
BRAKE TEST REQUIRED
design phase of the A380. On previous Providing the right tool and means to line
Previously, a test was required in the
Airbus aircraft, maintenance functions maintenance is key; however it is essen-
case of failures of wing tip brakes (system
were undertaken by independe nt tial to be able to dispatch out of the main
preventing a runaway of slats/flaps in
applications in various Line-Replace- base an aircraft which has only minor
case of dissymmetry/disconnection of
able Units (LRUs), such as the Central issues (‘go’ or ‘go if’ faults). Since
slats/flaps shaft).
Maintenance Computer or the Aircraft EIS, many studies have been launched
Condition Monitoring System. For the No dispatch was allowed if the test was to optimise and simplify MMEL proce-
A380, the focus was on integration. not passed. Since April 2014, dispatch dures (Master Minimum Equipment List).
for 3 flights is possible without perform-
ing the test, enabling airlines to fix the
Onboard Maintenance
failure at main base. FUEL – L(R) OUTR TK PMP FAULT
System (OMS)
At EIS, failure of one of the outer pumps
This is designed as a fully integrated COND - SECONDARY CABIN FANS
required checking that the emergency
component: FAULT
transfer was operative: this check means
• Access to Aircraft Full DupleX internet At EIS, depending on number of Low partially defuelling the aircraft to provide
network via a secured gateway Pressure (LP) fans failed, dispatch could some volume in feed tanks 1 and 4 to
be forbidden. Since July 2015, up to the be able to receive fuel from outer tanks
• Multiple interface access points
total number of LP fans (9) can be during the check.
through Portable Multi-Access
inoperative without preventing the Since January 2014, dispatch without
Terminal (PMAT) and a dedicated
dispatch, as long as aft cabin air this check is authorised, preventing
Onboard Maintenance Terminal (OMT)
extraction is operating (galleys, delays in case of pump failures.
• Other supporting functions such as lavatories and aft avionic bay).
data loading and aircraft monitoring
hosted by the same hardware Trimmable Horizontal Stabiliser
F/CTL - SLAT SYST 1 (CTL) FAULT (THS) Tail cone – LP5 fan
• Data transmission capability enhanced
for both in-flight and on-ground phases At EIS, failure of slat channel 1 (electrical In order to prevent fire, section 19 has
through High Frequency, Very High one) prevented any dispatch. Thanks to been fitted with a fan for better ventilation
Frequency and SATCOM (Satellite a modification of Flight Control computer on ground. At EIS, dispatch with this
Communication) but also gatelink PRIM and Fault Warning system together fan inoperative was possible providing
with an amendment of Go-Around an inspection for leaks was performed
operational procedure, dispatch with slat before the flight, which is time-consum-
channel 1 inoperative is accepted for ing, at least for the access. Since July
3 flights since June 2015, allowing the 2016, the need for inspection of section
airline to fix the failure at main base. 19 is conditioned by a combination of
Turnaround Time (TAT) with Outside Air
Temperature (OAT), avoiding delays
when right conditions of TAT and OAT
are met.
Future innovations
High Slip Induction Motor (HSIM)
fuel pumps (FS)
Pump reliability and maintenance costs improved by switching
to A350-like technology of HSIM having almost no electronic
parts. A beneficial side effect is a reduction of pump fairing size
and therefore fuel consumption.
EIS: Entry Into Service
Updating cockpit and communication systems
Since entry-into-service, A380 aircraft In terms of connectivity, IP SATCOM
have been fitted with the most advanced (Swift BroadBand - SBB) was proposed
integrated cockpit with 8 identical large from entry-into-service to manage both
displays (6” x 8”), proposing the current flight operations applications and
A320 and A330 Family formats (Primary passenger applications.
Flight Display, Navigation Display, Engine
New IP SATCOM (such as Ka Band
Warning Display, Secure Digital) and
SATCOM) are now proposed as well
additional formats such as Vertical
to answer a very demanding high band-
Displays (VD) and Multi-Functional
width market.
Displays (MFD).
New functions have been implemented
to the existing ones on Airbus families, FlySmart with Airbus
via a new avionic network using Avionics
The target of the Airbus Electronic Flight
Full-Duplex Switched Ethernet (AFDX).
Bag (EFB), called FlySmart with Airbus,
These include:
is to improve operational performance
• FLS (Flight Management System by providing information in the cockpit
based Landing System) function: and to reduce the use of paper
an Instrument Landing System (ILS) documentation.
look-alike way of flying a non-precision
FlySmart with Airbus started as an
approach computed by the FMS
aircraft-installed EFB (class 3) with
• GLS (GPS Landing System) CAT I integrated cockpit displays (Onboard
approach Information Terminal - OIT) on each
side of the captain and first officer.
• NADP (Noise Abatement Departure
Procedure) for a better noise abate- For operators preferring portable and
ment during departure phase installed EFB (class 2), Airbus will soon
propose new options based on WiFi links
• FANS (Future Air Navigation System)
in the cockpit which enable pilots’
A+B function, allowing datalink
electronic devices (tablets) to connect
communication for oceanic area and
to the aircraft.
remote areas through ACARS (FANS
A) and for continental areas through
ATN (Aeronautical Telecommunication
Network - FANS B)
To control these new functions, interac-
tivity through two Keyboard and Cursor
Control Units (KCCU) is proposed.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
84
Innovative systems and aircraft design
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
94
Innovative systems and aircraft design
Reducing impact on the environment
The European REACH regulation (Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of CHemicals)
came into force on 1 June 2007, with a gradual introduction of the obligations.
Its purpose is to control and progressively eliminate the most hazardous chemicals from the market.
It impacts all companies in the European Union, and therefore Airbus.
Protection of health, safety and the environment is a global priority for Airbus.
Management of hazardous Removal of chromates Halon replacement
substances
At entry-into-service, the A380 was a The second main challenge in the frame
REACH is generating unprecedented forerunner in the application of more of REACH is halon replacement.
changes in the way information on environmentally-friendly substances.
Halogenated hydrocarbons, also known
substances is exchanged and For its painting system, external
as halons, primarily halon 1301 (CBrF3),
responsibilities are distributed along chromate free primer and low volatile
halon 1211 (CBrClF2) and halon 2402
the supply chain. Airbus and its compound paint were introduced.
(CBrF2CBrF2), have proved to be very
supply chain have to identify, control Since then, a tremendous effort has
effective gaseous fire extinguishers and
and eliminate the various possible been concentrated in the eradication of
explosion suppressants, but with very
hazardous substances used in the compounds containing chromium VI.
high ozone layer depleting potential.
company, in design and throughout
This has been one of the biggest chal-
the lifecycle of Airbus products. At entry-into-service of the A380, this
lenges for over a decade. The complexity
agent was used in four different applications:
Airbus has to anticipate the evolution is mainly due to the fact that chromium
Auxiliary Power Unit (APU) / engine, cargo
of environmental regulations to avoid VI is found in numerous applications.
zone, lavatory waste bin and portable
material obsolescence. On the A380, No single alternative exists as chromates
extinguisher. In order to comply with ICAO
a lifecycle assessment is systemat- are widely applied for corrosion prevention
Standard 6 production cut-off dates,
ically performed before the launch (anodising process, primer and chemical
Airbus identified new agents, validated their
of any modification in order to better conversion coatings).
performance and introduced them on the
evaluate the environmental footprint.
A non-negligible task is the replacement production line.
of the hard chrome used on parts such
This is the case for lavatory waste bin
as bearings, bushes, axles, etc.
application where agent FE26 (an
Although hard chrome on its own is not
organofluoride gas) is used on every
prohibited, its deposition process that
single aircraft produced since 2011.
heavily uses chromates is.
For portable extinguishers, the agent 2BTP
Many areas still exist where alternative
has been selected as the most efficient
coating is being researched. The main
substitute for halon. Starting January 2017,
research focuses on the replacement
depending on local authorities’ directives,
of chromated basic primer. In the
operators can request the halon-free fire
coming years, REACH will evolve with
extinguisher (called HAFFEX) to be installed
the replacement of cadmium plating and
in the cabin.
borate compounds. Although no official
date has yet been announced, Airbus On APU/engine and cargo, important
has started research in these fields. R&T efforts are made to identify the best
chemical agent for the new type certificate.
Up to now, no production cut-off date has
been defined by the International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO) and European
Commission.
CONCLUSION
The A380 programme will continue to scan innovations on the market and will integrate them in future
evolutions, taking into consideration quickly evolving techniques as well as the needs of increasingly
demanding airlines and passengers.
Capability and profitability
enhancements
Ensuring that an aircraft is capable of satisfying the diverse Article by
requirements of customers is essential to the success of Geraldine BUSSON
A380 Cabin & Cargo Manager
the whole programme. Each airline has its own strategy,
AIRBUS
targeting a particular market segment and operating a geraldine.busson@airbus.com
particular network. These factors determine the airline’s
Jonathan PREIST
choice of aircraft and how it operates them. A380 Overall Aircraft Design Manager
AIRBUS
jonathan.preist@airbus.com
The A380 was designed with flexibility in mind to ensure
that it can respond to the needs of a wide customer base.
This flexibility has been enhanced through a number of
changes since its entry-into-service and will continue to
be enhanced by other modifications in the next few years,
bringing value to customers.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
05
A customer seeks best operational value by maximising revenue and
minimising costs on its aircraft. This value can be affected by many factors.
Fuel cost
On long range aircraft, fuel accounts for about half of total operating costs and is
an important cost reduction lever for airlines. The A380 entered into service with
unbeatable fuel per passenger per kilometre and its fuel burn performance has since
been improved by working on a number of complementary axes.
Cabin revenue
The A380 offers unprecedented options to provide exceptional levels of comfort
across all classes, enabling operators to adapt the cabin layout to suit their objectives.
A number of enhancements are in development to improve the revenue potential while
ensuring that the A380 retains its level of comfort and unique passenger experience.
Range capability
With its 8200 nautical miles (NM) typical maximum passenger range capability, the
A380 has already demonstrated its capability to economically operate even longer
routes such as Dallas-Sydney and Dubai-Auckland. Increases in range capability can
be used to increase payload during the most demanding months of the year when
the payload may be limited by take-off weight or to enable even longer routes to be
envisaged.
Payload capability
Some airlines choose not to operate the A380 at its maximum range capability.
However, payload capability may be important to ensure economic operations with
the selected cabin layout. For example, the passenger payload of high density one-
class layout needs to be accommodated by the aircraft structure.
Airport constraints
Airlines often operate under numerous airport constraints depending on their
network. The frequency of operations may be limited by external noise quotas,
aircraft separation distances or runway occupancy time, among others.
(Read more in A380 - The solution for airlines and airports on page 10).
These factors affecting the operational value of airlines can be addressed
by different levers.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
15
Capability and profitability enhancements
Reducing aircraft drag
Drag reductions lead to cost savings thanks to
reduced fuel consumption and can also lead
to significant revenue increases. Greater revenue
can come from increased payload on demanding
routes, or from new routes that require increased
range capability.
A better understanding of the physical phenomena
or modelling tool capabilities enables improvements
to aircraft designs. An example of this on the A380
was the modification of the wing pressure
distribution in 2013. This was achieved by adapting
the spanwise wing twist distribution, resulting in
significant drag reduction. This modification was
obtained by adjusting the manufacturing jigs within
the limits of their initial capabilities.
Improving engine fuel burn
Engine fuel burn improvements can bring cost
savings and revenue increases. The fuel burn of
the A380 (equipped with Rolls-Royce Trent 900
and Engine Alliance GP7200 engines) has been
improved since its entry-into-service thanks to a
combination of production tolerance control and
packages of engine modifications.
An example of this is the Trent 900 Enhanced
Performance package suite developed
by Rolls-Royce. This package notably features
improved compressor blade aerodynamics
(elliptical leading edges), which reduce the
flow separation behind the leading edge thus
improving turbomachinery efficiency.
Another example from Engine Alliance (a Joint
Venture of General Electric and Pratt & Whitney)
is the enhanced engine control software that
modifies the turbine case cooling to optimise
turbine blade tip clearance through the different
phases of the mission delivering an improved
mission fuel burn.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
25
Capability and profitability enhancements
A380 wing jig
Engine Alliance GP7200 engine
Min noise
3500
-5.5 dB
3450
Flight data collection
Flight data collection 3400
Aircraft performance
Airline reference
monitoring analytics
3350 procedure Aircraft performance
(standard NADP) monitoring analytics
-2.5 dB
Performance Performance
3300 Min noise -40 kg database adjustments
Performance Performance
at ISO-fuel -100 kg adjustments database
3250 Min fuel
at ISO-noise
Aircraft
3200 Updated
Min fuel Performance adjustments Updated performance
adjustments
3150
70 72 74 FMS
Noise (dB) Performance FMS
database performance
database
Updated Flight
flight plan planner Flight Updated flight plan
computations planner computations
)gk(
leuF
76 78 80
Min noise
3500
-5.5 dB
3450
Flight data collection Flight data collection
3400
Aircraft performance Aircraft performance
Airline reference
monitoring analytics monitoring analytics
3350 procedure
(standard NADP)
-2.5 dB
Performance Performance Performance
3300 Min noise -40 Kg database adjustments adjustments
at ISO-fuel -100 Kg
3250 Min fuel Aircraft
at ISO-noise
3200 Updated Updated
Min fuel Performance Performance
adjustments adjustments
3150
70 72 74 FMS
Noise (dB) Performance
database
Updated Flight Flight Updated
flight plan planner planner flight plan
computations computations
)gK(
leuF
Optimising aircraft operations
Aircraft operations can be made more efficient either by flying the aircraft differently to
optimise its trajectory, or by a reduction of the fuel reserves enabled by a better under-
standing of the actual aircraft performance.
Min noise
3500
-5.5 dB
3450
Flight data collection
Flight data collection
3400
Aircraft performance
Airline reference
monitoring analytics
3350 procedure Aircraft performance
(standard NADP) monitoring analytics
-2.5 dB
Performance Performance
3300 Min noise -40 kg database adjustments
Performance Performance
at ISO-fuel -100 kg adjustments database
3250 Min fuel
at ISO-noise
Aircraft
3200 Updated
Min fuel Performance
adjustments Updated performance
adjustments
3150
70 72 74 FMS
Noise (dB) Performance FMS
database performance
database
The Multi-Criteria Departure Procedure (MCDP) optimisation capability offers flexibility
enabling airline flight operations to define their own strategy for optimising external
Updated Flight
noise and fuel burn. It also offers a unique possibility to target specific areas in the
flight plan planner Flight Updated flight plan vicinity of the airport where noise exposure on the ground is to be minimised.
computations planner computations
The dedicated A380 Flight Management System (FMS) functionality enables the
aircraft to take full advantage of the MCDP concept without increasing pilot workload
during the departure phase, compared to the NADP (Noise Abatement Departure
Procedure) Standard Operating Procedures that are in common usage. This capability
enables variations up to -200kg of fuel and -10dB external noise to be achieved on
the A380 depending on the airline operational reference.
Performance modelling improvements
The FMS contributes to operational efficiency by providing flight plan
predictions and optimised speeds for trajectories. The accuracy of
the predictions and precision of the identified optimum is dependent
on the representativeness of the aircraft physics embedded within the
models and of the forecasted atmospheric conditions.
New generation aircraft performance monitoring analytics developed
by Airbus will enable the performance model to closely follow the age-
ing of the aircraft across the various flight phases in service for flight
planning purposes.
The associated gain in computational rates of these analytics will also
enable real-time trajectory re-optimisation, taking into account
evolutions in the forecasted weather during the flight.
An FMS upgrade containing these functions is currently being studied.
Performance
database
76 78 80 FMS
Performance
database
)gk(
leuF
76 78 80
Min noise
3500
-5.5 dB
3450
Flight data collection Flight data collection
3400
Aircraft performance Aircraft performance
Airline reference
monitoring analytics monitoring analytics
3350 procedure
(standard NADP) -2.5 dB
Performance Performance Performance
3300 Min noise -40 Kg database adjustments adjustments
at ISO-fuel -100 Kg
3250 Min fuel Aircraft
at ISO-noise
3200 Updated Updated
Min fuel Performance Performance
adjustments adjustments
3150
70 72 74 FMS
Noise (dB) Performance
database
Updated Flight Flight Updated
flight plan planner planner flight plan
computations computations
)gK(
leuF
Fuel and external noise benefits from departure optimisation
Performance
database
76 78 80 FMS
Performance
database
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
35
Capability and profitability enhancements
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
45
Capability and profitability enhancements
Reducing aircraft weight
Weight reductions are an important part of aircraft improvement because every kilo
of weight saved equates to a kilo of additional payload capability. For this reason, the
A380 underwent an extensive weight-saving programme that reduced aircraft weight
by 1.8 tonnes after the introduction of more composites and light-weight metal alloys,
structural optimisation and system simplification.
An example of this was the replacement of 2026/2027 Aluminium by third generation
Al-Li (Aluminium-Lithium) on the lower wing skin. A total weight-saving of 740 kg was
achieved thanks to the reduced density and improved material properties of Al-Li that
allowed the detailed design of the wing covers (re-pocketing, thickness, grow-out radii)
to be re-optimised.
Structural optimisation included
improvements to stringer grow out
radii, pocketing and thickness tailoring
of wing covers enabled by the change
of material.
Increasing design weights capability
Increasing design weights delivers improved capabilities. Increasing Maximum
Take-Off Weight (MTOW) improves the range capability or allows payload to be
increased on the most demanding routes. Increasing Maximum Zero Fuel Weight
(MZFW) enables more payload to be carried on shorter routes. Increasing Maximum
Landing Weight (MLW) is necessary to maintain fuel reserves at landing when MZFW
is increased or to allow fuel reserves to be increased to enable operations to airports
with distant alternate airports.
In 2013, the design weights were increased at the same time as the modification The increased rapidity of the sensors
to the twist of the wing (+6 tonnes of MTOW and +3 tonnes of MZFW & MLW). in the Multi-Function Probe enabled
This was achieved with limited structural reinforcement thanks to the development the Load Alleviation Function to be
of a more effective Load Alleviation Function that was enabled by the implementation enhanced to facilitate increased
of more rapid gust sensors in the multi-function probe and by the identification of design weights.
optimum design weight increases taking into account existing structural margins.
480
)sennot(
thgieW
leuF-oreZ
mumixaM
Payload-range capability enhanced in 2013
by introduction of increased design weights
374
Enhanced design weights envelope
372
on all deliveries since 2013:
MTOW capability
370 (575.369)
increased by 6 tonnes;
368 MZFW increased by 3 tonnes
(572.367)
366
(569.366) Design weights envelope
364 for EIS design
362
Retrofittable design weights
360 increase for EIS design from 2017
500 520 540 560 580 (MTOW capability increased by 3 tonnes;
Minimum Take-Off Weight (tonnes) MZFW increased by 1 tonne)
To enhance the payload-range capability of the entry-into-service standard of aircraft
(aircraft delivered prior to the 2013 design weights increase), existing structural
margins have been used to enable the MTOW & MZFW of the range mode weight
variant to be increased by 3 tonnes and 1 tonne respectively, with no modifications
to the aircraft structure. This improves the maximum range capability of the aircraft by
90 NM and improves payload capability by 1.8 tonnes on critical routes.
Cabin efficiency and revenue potential
Airbus and airlines are always seeking to maximise cabin efficiency and consequently
the revenue potential of the aircraft. To support this, new cabin features can be
implemented, depending on cabin design.
New cabin improvement package
The cabin package has been launched to deliver short-term improvements.
It consists of several cabin modifications, in a continued effort to optimise the
cabin and make it more efficient, with the same high level of comfort.
The sidewall panel position has been modified to deliver increased cabin width for
the main deck 11-abreast economy class seating configuration. This configuration
already enables 20 to 30 economy class seats to be added to the cabin compared
to the 10-abreast configuration.
This 11-abreast configuration is already proposed with the same level of comfort
as for the 10-abreast thanks to its 18” seat width. The sidewall rotation
modification will provide 0.83 additional inches (21mm) on each side of the cabin,
by a modification of the lower sidewall attachment to make it more vertical thereby
giving more lateral legroom to the passenger.
A 9-abreast premium economy class seating configuration is now proposed for
the main deck. In order to have the most efficient cabin layout, the current trend
is to introduce a 4-class layout with a premium economy class. The best location
for the 9-abreast premium economy class is forward of main deck door 2.
This 3-3-3 seating arrangement requires the installation of an additional seat rail
and is offered in linefit and retrofit.
The upper deck cabin width has been increased enabling extra seats or comfort
level to be improved in the business class zone. This modification consists of
removing the current sidewall stowage and of introducing a new air recirculation
system enabling new lower sidewall dado panels to be installed, adding up to
21cm to cabin width.
The modification is a major contributor to space gain in the upper deck.
As an example, when combined with a herringbone business class configuration,
up to 10 additional seats can be added. This cabin improvement will become
the new A380 standard from 2017.
21mm
211
mm
Pre-mod.
Pre-mod.
107
Post-mod. Post- Pre-
mm
mod. mod.
Sidewall panels New dado panels
- increased cabin - up to 21cm
width on main deck extra cabin width
on upper deck 97
mm
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
55
Capability and profitability enhancements
Aft Galley Stair Module
In addition to cabin efficiency improvements, Airbus has studied the constraints
related to monuments. As little use is made of the aft stairs by passengers, a new stair
concept for crew was developed.
As a result, a fully-integrated Aft Galley Stair Module (AGSM) containing a U-shape
stair and integrated galleys can be installed in the rear of the cabin, allowing the
galleys located around the main deck door 4 to be removed or significantly reduced.
The galley customisation will still allow the airlines to configure their on-board service
according to their own requirements and the AGSM will add up to 14 seats compared
to designs with the current aft stair.
This new module is planned to be introduced in the A380 cabin early in 2019
(also available in retrofit).
Airbus is currently studying further cabin development in the forward section to offer
even more space without compromising comfort.
Upper deck
Main deck
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
65
Capability and profitability enhancements
Capability and profitability enhancements
Optimised crew rest areas
As part of the space optimisation strategy, Airbus is now introducing a combined flight
and cabin crew rest area in the catalogue of options for 2017. This new area includes
two additional bunks for the flight crew, installed in the lower deck cabin crew rest
area, bringing the total number of bunks to 14. The flight crew rest area may be sepa-
rated from the cabin crew rest area by an optional partition.
This combined crew rest area frees up space at the current flight crew rest area just
behind the cockpit, which will be used to relocate three lavatories. This in turn enables
additional seats to be installed in the main deck cabin.
The lower deck crew rest area can also be relocated in the forward cargo area with an
entrance door next to the forward trolley lift. This new location gives additional flexibility
in the design of the seating zone between main deck door 2 and 3 thanks to the
removal of the fixed point related to the aft crew rest access. The forward lower deck
crew rest location also enables one more pallet to be installed in the hold.
Flexible cabin changes
Airlines can now adapt their cabin configuration to seasonal constraints by changing
the class split within the cabin. They can define alternative cabin layouts within two
zones: main deck between door 1 and 2 and upper deck aft of door 1.
The structure, cabin equipment and systems are adapted to enable these layouts to
be installed by the airline in under 4 days, depending on the magnitude of the changes.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
75
Combined flight and cabin crew rest area, including two additional bunks, installed in the lower deck
Economic gains from A380 enhancements
Upper deck sidewall
More cabin revenue
New rear stairs stowage removal
This cabin revenue enhancement can *14 Economy class *6 Business class
be illustrated using a 4-class cabin
configuration. This configuration shows
how the airlines can benefit from several
cabin efficiency developments including
1.5 M$ 2.6 M$
the main deck 11-abreast economy Combined
class seating, the 9-abreast premium crew rest
economy class seating, the upper deck *3 Premium 0.6 M$ Total
new dado panel for business class economy 9.6 M$
optimisation and the new aft galley stair
class
module. The combination of these new
developments could bring an annual 2.4 M$ 2.5 M$
airline revenue increase of up to
$9 million per aircraft, while maintaining
the exceptional levels of A380 comfort. 11-abreast Eco class
The relative contributions of the different
9-abreast Premium eco class *23 Economy class
developments to this revenue enhance-
*11 Premium economy class
ment are shown in the chart to the right. Assumptions used for value
Mission: 4000 NM
Flights per year: 584
Load factor for additional seats: 50% in all classes
*Estimated additional seats Yields: same yields
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
85
Capability and profitability enhancements
A380 operational capability and economics have been significantly enhanced since
entry-into-service (EIS) in 2007.
Lower fuel consumption
Fuel consumption savings from airframe drag reductions, engine efficiency improve-
ments and weight savings described previously have led to a reduction of the block
fuel consumed for a 4000 NM mission of 2.3% relative to the EIS standard of the
aircraft. Further operational fuel consumption improvements can be achieved thanks
to Multi-Criteria Departure Procedure optimisation capability.
Increased range and payload Payload range capability
This efficiency improvement, combined with 90
the increased Maximum Take-Off Weight 80
introduced in 2013, leads to an increase
70
in range capability of 375 NM compared
60
to the EIS standard of the aircraft. Increasing
the range capability has been key in enabling 50
new routes such as Dubai–Auckland and in
40
developing revenue capability on demanding
30
routes thanks to the additional 7.8 tonne
payload offered at iso-range. 20
This additional payload capability facilitates 10
the implementation of cabin improvements
0
for increased revenue. 500
)sennot(
daolyaP
1,500 2,500 3,500 4,500 5,500 6,500 7,500 8,500 9,500 10,500
Distance (NM) 2013 enhancements
EIS standard
Max. pax payload
Capability and profitability enhancements
Some airlines seek to maximise cabin revenue with high density layout such as the example given below.
This layout with 855 passengers shows how the A380 cabin can be adapted for large numbers, while
maintaining the A380 economy class comfort standard including 18-inch seat width.
The combination of the above features of the A380 cabin design can also be adapted to maximise
revenue for airlines focusing on ultra long range operations, over 15-16 hours of flight.
CONCLUSION
To respond to customer expectations, fuel burn performance, mission capability and revenue
potential of the A380 have been improved since entry-into-service in 2007 by the implementation
of cost-effective modifications. New cabin enhancements, available between 2017 and 2019,
will further improve the revenue potential of the A380 cabin.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
95
This standard layout of 544 seats that includes the above enhancements, except for the Aft Galley
Stair Module (AGSM), can deliver a significant overall benefit without having to introduce a stretched
fuselage version. If the AGSM is installed, it can enable an additional 14 seats.
Example of a contractual and industrial set-up between FHS-TSP stakeholders
Customer
Airline Furnished Airline Local
Equipment Authority
(CFE)
Maintenance Control Centre
Maintenance Operations Centre
Airbus FHS
on-site team Airbus FHS pool Fleet technical management Operations
and logistics Engineering and Planning
Airbus approved
MRO provider
repair stations Airbus aircraft MRO/OEMs manufacturer
Repair Design office
OEMs Airbus Line Base
shops
Components maintenance Engineering Aircraft maintenance
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
06
Service packages
to optimise operations
Current and future A380 customers are increasingly
focused on securing operational performance excellence
at a competitive cost. Airlines can choose a customised
turnkey service package from Airbus. It provides an
efficient solution for airline operations by maximising
on-time fleet dispatch, minimising upfront investment
and securing maintenance and entry-into-service costs.
Services for operators introducing second-hand A380s
into their fleets, include pilot and maintenance training,
and upgrades such as cabin reconfiguration.
Tailored Support Package
Article by (left to right)
Airbus offers a suite of services, packaged and customised to meet customer needs.
Alexa FIGGESS
The cornerstone of every offer is the Flight Hour Services - Tailored Support Package
Customer Services,
(FHS-TSP).
A380 Market Development Platform
The core module systematically included in the service is FHS-Components which AIRBUS
guarantees spare parts availability from an inventory pool, as well as an exclusive alexa.figgess@airbus.com
on-site stock at the customer’s main base, and component repair by-the-hour.
Juan RAMON-BOSQUE
Airlines may then add the following optional modules:
Marketing Manager Services Solutions
• Engineering services, providing Airbus expertise for advanced fleet technical AIRBUS
management (maintenance programme and planning, reliability programme, juan.ramon-bosque@airbus.com
engineering support, airworthiness review, etc.)
Claude GENTILS
• Airframe maintenance, dealing with the execution of scheduled maintenance
Head of Aircraft Sales Support
(line, base and heavy maintenance)
AIRBUS
A full TSP solution can provide a guarantee of aircraft availability On-Time claude.gentils@airbus.com
Performance (OTP) covering technical, logistics and maintenance delays.
With this modular service,
airlines select what best suits
their maintenance strategy, ranging
from Airbus assistance up to full
outsourcing of engineering
activities.
For airframe maintenance
(line, base, heavy check) with
Airbus FHS-TSP, airlines can
integrate their affiliated
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
(MRO) centre when they have
developed their own capabilities,
or use a ‘best in class’ MRO
provider as per the Airbus standard.
CONCLUSION
The Airbus turnkey service package offers modular solutions to airlines to help them
reach high performance levels, adapted to their individual needs. This enables operators
to achieve a smooth entry-into-service and cost-effective operations when adding new
or second-hand A380s to their fleet.
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
16
Service packages to optimise operations
Airbus FHS now covers over 313 aircraft of all Airbus types,
and is currently supporting five A380 operators.
Singapore Airlines (SIA) has recently opted to extend its existing A380 FHS-
Components support agreement to a full ‘Flight Hour Services - Tailored Support
Package’ (FHS-TSP) contract to integrate and provide full component support,
line and base airframe maintenance, as well as fleet technical management services
for its A380 fleet.
Under this 10-year agreement, Singapore Airlines will benefit from Airbus experience
and expertise in maintenance, engineering, reliability and supply chain management,
partnering together with its affiliated MRO SIA Engineering Company (SIAEC).
Support for second-hand A380s
For operators acquiring second-hand A380s, Airbus is proposing a package of services
in addition to FHS-TSP, to support the Entry-Into-Service (EIS) and daily operations.
The package includes specific A380 training for flight and cabin crews, mechanics
and performance engineers, as well as technical data and software required to
maintain and operate A380 aircraft. An Airbus Field Service Representative is available
at the airline main base to ensure smooth EIS. The A380 Health Monitoring service
(AiRTHM) is also available to improve dispatch and operations. The scope and
duration of this package is fully customised to complement the FHS-TSP offer
and to match the airline’s operations.
Aircraft lessors and potential customers can also benefit from Airbus services to
support aircraft transition, with a particular focus on cabin reconfiguration.
The choice of cabin layout options for reconfiguration of A380 aircraft has been carefully
studied to fit market needs, and is based on modularity and ease of reconfiguration.
As a result, transition costs are reduced to the minimum while leaving much autonomy
to lessors and operators to choose a cabin that fits their operations, all this with the
unmatched seating capacity and comfort of the award-winning A380 cabin.
Upgrade engineering is performed by highly skilled Airbus teams that use design
methods, tools and specifications equivalent to production quality standards, including
the management of the aircraft configuration and aircraft document update.
The resulting Service Bulletin (SB), allows the airline-selected MRO teams to perform
and certify the modifications on the aircraft, thanks also to the pre-consolidated
and certified upgrade kits.
For the upgrade embodiment phase, Airbus can offer a complete solution or support
the customer’s MRO with services such as tool leasing, shipment consolidation
and follow-up, job card preparation, needed to ensure a successful start to an A380’s
second life.
The choice is yours
FAST magazine is also a media-enriched app,
now available on tablet and smartphone (Android, iOS and Windows)
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
26
noitide
laicepS
083A
-TSAF
36
Around the clock, around the world
Airbus has more than 300 field representatives, based in over 130 cities
Technical, Material & Logistics
USA/CANADA Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas:
Tel: +1 703 834 3484 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +1 703 834 3464 Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500 Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
airtac@airbus.com ifd.spares@airbus.com
CHINA
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 Spares AOG/Work Stoppage Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas:
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162 • Outside the Americas: Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001 Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011 hmv.spares@airbus.com
ADMINISTRATION aog.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936 Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
• In the Americas:
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964 Please contact your dedicated customer spares
Tel: +1 70 3729 9000
account representative
Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
csr.na@airbus.com
aog.na@airbus.com
Training centres
Airbus Training Centre Airbus Training Centre Americas Training by Airbus Jakarta
Toulouse, France Miami, Florida - U.S.A. antoine.renaud@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 82 24 Tel: +1 (305) 871-3655 (switchboard)
or +33 (0)5 61 93 39 75 Fax: +1 305 871 4649 Airbus Asia Training Centre Singapore
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094 miamicustomertrainingsales@airbus.com contact.info.aatc@airbus.com
training.commercial@airbus.com Tel: +65 6877 4300 (reception)
customercare.atc-europe@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Beijing
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 - 3017/3016 Airbus Mexico Training Centre
Airbus Maintenance + 86 10 80 48 65 training.commercial@airbus.com
Training Centre Tel: +52 55 57 86 80 50
Hamburg, Germany Airbus Training Centre Bangalore (communication and marketing)
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288 Tel: 91-080-6638230 (reception)
Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8598 Training by Airbus Korea,
training.commercial@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Delhi Seoul, South Korea
atc.hamburg@airbus.com Tel: +91 9880065511 Tel: +82 (0)32 882 5425
andrew.rapson@airbuskorea.com
Training by Airbus Dubai,
UAE - Airbus Middle East FZE Dubai
Tel: +971 4 602 78 62
mary-knoll.garcia@airbus.com
How can I fly more
passengers to the
most popular airports
at peak times?
Fly the A380. The world’s most
spacious commercial aircraft.
Capture more high-yield traffic
on the busiest routes and offer
the highest passenger appeal
with 18+ inch seats in economy.
Airbus is the answer.
airbus.com
© AIRBUS, 2016. All rights reserved. Airbus, its logo and the product names are registered trademarks.
STUDIO:PUblIcIS lOnDOn:2016:AIrbUS – b1362-001013-00:12186_AIr_QA_MASTer_2016:12186_AIr_QA_HOngKOng_MASTer_297x210_1.0
12 OcTOber 2016 2:53 PM | SIZE: 297X210MM | BLEED: 3MM | PUBLICATION: HONG KONG MASTER | CODE: X
CUTTER LASER PMS APPROVAL
12186_AIR_QA_HongKong_Master_297x210_1.0
