Airbus technical magazine
April 2017
#59
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Already have the FAST app?
Now keep in touch with Newsfeed by Airbus
bringing the latest news for customers
FAST
byAirbus byAirbus
FAST and Newsfeed by Airbus apps
are downloadable to your preferred device*
*excluding Blackberry®
95#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#59
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Chief Editor: Deborah BUCKLER
The ground handling
Design: PONT BLEU
challenge 04
Cover image: Philippe MASCLET Saving time and money
Printer: Amadio
Authorisation for reprinting N-Tracking for flights 10
FAST magazine articles
Smarter tracking for decision-making
should be requested by email:
fast.magazine@airbus.com and analysis
FAST magazine is available on internet
www.airbus.com/support/publications Transferring aircraft
also on tablets and smartphones between operators 16
ISSN 1293-5476 Key factors for successful handovers
Staying on line 24
© AIRBUS 2017 All rights reserved. Proprietary document Eliminating unwanted offset
from the steering system
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified FAST from the past 30
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in Around the clock,
mad t e h i h s e d r o e c in u m do e n n t o t o r c o w n i s th ti t r u e t s e p a e n c t o t f o fe t r h o e r i n fo fo rm rm p a a ti r o t n o f d e a s n c y r c ib o e n d t r h a e c r t. e i T n h . e T y h a e r s e t a b t a e s m ed e n o t n s around the world 31
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be Field representatives
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Corporate Heritage,
Master Films, Hervé Gousset, Philippe Masclet, Jean-Baptiste Accariez, Cassian Koshorst,
Sorbis/Shutterstock, Artzenter/Shutterstock, Markus Schmal/Shutterstock,
95#TSAF
40
The ground handling
challenge
Article by
Serge KIYMAZ
Structure Engineer
AIRBUS
serge.kiymaz@airbus.com
Saving time and money
Over the last 20 years, turnaround time has become a strategic challenge
in operations due to increasing competition between airlines and due to
airport congestion; less time on the ground means more time generating
income, and subsequently greater profitability of the airlines.
Ensuring training and best practices of ground handling staff can help
eliminate many issues, in particular those relating to service and cargo
doors, thus avoiding unnecessary time and costs of aircraft on the ground.
95#TSAF
50
The ground handling challenge
The risk in the race to reduce turnaround time is that corners may be cut, correct
procedures not respected, and consequences may actually be time-consuming
and expensive to fix.
The most spectacular examples are collisions with Ground Support Equipment (GSE)
such as stairs, catering trucks and cargo loaders.
Damage caused by collision with Ground Support Equipment
However, thanks to new generation GSE and ground personnel training, these major
occurrences are decreasing. Despite this, statistics show that an increasing number
of less obvious incidents concerning the access/service doors and cargo doors are
starting to emerge, with incorrect ground handling practices being the cause.
Isolated minor mishandling procedures do not appear particularly serious, and yet
when repeated cycle after cycle, they create fatigue and eventually damage the aircraft.
A better knowledge of the precise areas most commonly damaged by non-respected
ground handling procedures will help to alleviate these costly repairs.
Damage to a fuel panel following incomplete latch engagement
95#TSAF
60
The ground handling challenge
Access/service doors
Access/service doors are used for various purposes such as refuelling, hydraulic fluid
servicing, potable water/toilet/waste servicing and cabin air conditioning. They are
mainly located under the belly of the aircraft and therefore highly exposed to ground
personnel, carts and GSE traffic.
Without being specific to any type of aircraft family, there are 2 main types of damage:
• Damage to latches due to the use of sharp tools.
Using sharp tools such as screwdrivers to open latches is a commonly ‘accepted’
practice for ground handling personnel. However, this practice gradually damages the
latch which, if it eventually breaks, renders the door inoperative and often leads to
delays until it can be replaced.
• Incomplete closure of access/service doors.
Incomplete latch engagement due to dirt accumulation/latch damage/human error
may lead to the door opening in flight and potential damage/loss of the door.
95#TSAF
70
The ground handling challenge
Airbus maintenance data shows that each aircraft family has specific areas that suffer
from irregular ground handling practices:
A320 Family
• Waste service panel 172AL is experiencing latch corrosion and failure.
This is caused by improper cleaning after servicing. The corrosive deposits/spillage left
during waste servicing slowly attack the latch/hinge material and potentially lead to
their failure.
Airbus recommends rinsing the whole waste servicing area with water to remove all
contamination.
A330/A340 Family
• Avionics door flap is found deformed,
which may disenable the locking
system; in turn, this may trigger an
ECAM* open flap warning which could
potentially lead to an in-flight turn back.
Airbus recommends operating the handle as shown in the Aircraft Maintenance
Manual (AMM) to avoid damage.
*ECAM - Electronic centralised aircraft monitor
A350
• Belly fairing access panels with a ‘hold open’ device are being damaged on the
internal hold open bracket. Investigations have shown that the locking pin is not
removed prior to door closure and that the bracket’s lugs are sheared off.
Airbus recommends removing the locking pin before door closure,
as shown in the AMM.
95#TSAF
80
The ground handling challenge
Cargo doors
Cargo doors (including the bulk cargo door) and their surroundings
are recognised as frequently damaged areas by cargo loader collisions
during turnaround time.
In some cases, however, mishandling by ground personnel can damage
specific areas on the following aircraft:
A320 Family
• The bulk cargo door handle housing sustains chaffing damage when the
handle is rotated and stowed at the same time. This mishandling could
be caused by the access platform being too small.
If this action is repeated and not repaired, then the door skin may be
damaged and the handle housing could puncture, leading to cabin
pressure leaks.
• Cargo door proximity sensor is displaced.
During loading the cargo loader bumper may touch the proximity sensor
and its bracket, bending it slightly and/or unseating the wiring connector
from the sensor.
This may generate ‘cargo door open’ warnings during taxi/climb and
subsequent delays/in flight turnback.
A330/A340 Family
• The bulk cargo door ‘hold open’ mechanism is damaged due to
mishandling. When opening and stowing the bulk cargo door, the
handle is not positioned back to the LOCKED position and is thrown
open with excessive force, striking the ‘hold open’ mechanism.
Once the damage has been initiated, it will worsen at each opening. If the
damage is left unrepaired and is repeated, the ‘hold open’ mechanism
could be completely destroyed and the bulk cargo door primary structure
will be affected, potentially leading to costly repairs or its replacement.
• The bulk cargo door balance mechanism springs are found entangled
and consequently inoperative.
This happens when cargo hold area divider nets are not used, allowing
cargo items to fall on the balance mechanism and/or when the bulk cargo
door is opened too fast without care.
A380 and A350
• The bulk cargo door experiences a hinge arm disconnection.
This happens during the door closing sequence.
This type of event may happen if the ‘hold open’ mechanism is locked
and the bulk cargo door is forced down for closure.
Good ground handling practices are essential to ensure smooth aircraft operations without
interruption and without incurring additional operating costs.
Attention needs to be focused on the fact that ‘bad habits create big burdens’. Actions such as
opening a latch using a screwdriver, or skipping waste service panel cleaning to save time may be
regarded as ‘acceptable and common’ practices, but they often result in a grounded aircraft
because of the damage they cause. Inappropriate handling and/or lack of training can lead to
extremely costly issues; a wrongly handled A330/A340 bulk cargo door may lead to its replacement
(up to 280,000 USD). Regular deterioration to latches leads to replacement and may eventually result
in an access/service door detachment in flight.
In addition to the recommendations listed above, the Airbus Training Centre provides
a ground handling course to help airlines and ground service providers improve the quality
of ground handling.
For further information on ground handling training,
contact Airbus Training at commercial.training@airbus.com
95#TSAF
90
The ground handling challenge
CONCLUSION
95#TSAF
01
N-Tracking
for flights
Smarter tracking for decision-making and analysis
N-Tracking is a flight tracking application, developed
by NAVBLUE, in response to new requirements from the
International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) which
will be applicable in November 2018. This tracking tool
detects and shares information about abnormal aircraft
behaviour, enabling decision-making to help alleviate
Article by issues and to contribute to safety.
Thomas STANISLAWIAK
Head of Portfolio Development
& Innovation
NAVBLUE, Toulouse
thomas.stanislawiak@airbus.com
95#TSAF
11
N-Tracking for flights
Why track a flight?
The push to track commercial flights grew after the loss of the Air France Rio-Paris
flight in 2009, but gained unprecedented momentum after the disappearance of the
Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 in 2014. Two months after the incident, the international
civil aviation community, led by International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO),
established the Global Aeronautical Distress and Safety System (GADSS) and
recommended establishing standards.
The standards require every airline to record the location of all flights every 15 minutes
during normal operations, as of November 2018. Airlines are left to decide individually
how to meet this requirement. In the longer term, ICAO is looking to also develop
requirements for abnormal and distress tracking. This will require more development
time, due to the complexity and potential reliance of these standards on new technologies.
The NAVBLUE N-Tracking solution
Background
Participating in the ICAO Working Groups tasked with defining standards for abnormal
situations, NAVBLUE developed this flight tracking solution enabling airlines to comply
with the expanded ICAO requirements that come into effect in November 2018.
Aircraft information via N-Tracking
NAVBLUE collaborated with dispatchers and maintenance engineers in various airline
Operation Control Centres (OCC) to learn how they track fleets and communicate
with aircraft and to incorporate their needs.
N-Tracking is a web-based application that is compatible with most common web
browsers facilitating communication between commercial, operational and maintenance
staff. As all parties work from shared, identical information, collaborative decisions
are easier to make.
95#TSAF
21
N-Tracking for flights
The most accurate and cost-effective solution
In order to track fleets, some airlines prefer to use solely In the N-Tracking user interface, all aircraft are displayed on a
ACARS* reports, which can be costly as each message has a map in one of three intuitive colour codes: yellow for own fleet,
fee associated with it. As oceanic or remote regions do not blue for other aircraft moving to/from an airport of reference,
have ADS-B* receivers, N-Tracking obtains the position of the red/amber alerting to own aircraft’s deviation from its expected
aircraft by merging ADS-B data from Flightradar24* with location. Deviations could include events such as loss of
ACARS data. Technology specialists at NAVBLUE believe that position, significant altitude change or excessive vertical speed.
taking advantage of ADS-B data, which covers the majority of By clicking on symbols representing their aircraft, dispatchers
the flight area, and utilising solely ACARS data for oceanic and can obtain other data elements such as ETA*, altitude, vertical
remote areas, provides the most accurate and cost-effective speed, ground speed and flown distance to help manage their
flight tracking solution. For ADS-B data, NAVBLUE has fleets more proactively.
partnered with Flightradar24, a Swedish company with by far
the widest coverage in the market.
Tracking flights with N-Tracking
N-Tracking for flights
95#TSAF
31
NAVBLUE
N-Tracking also provides multiple overlays of NAVBLUE is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Airbus and a key unit of
weather information such as FIR*, tropical cyclone, Services by Airbus*, providing a new generation of digital, user-friendly
wind pressure data, METARS*, Satellite, Radar, flight operations and air traffic management solutions.
SIGMETS*, AIRMET* and PIREPs* to provide a
NAVBLUE’s portfolio integrates the existing product offer of Navtech*,
holistic visual of the aircraft’s actual flying
supported by Airbus ProSky’s air traffic management solutions, as well
conditions for situational awareness.
as Airbus’ flight operations innovations such as ROPS* and FlySmart*.
For weather information, NAVBLUE has partnered
with Schneider Electric, an industry leader in The NAVBLUE solutions and services are not just limited to Airbus
weather forecasting. aircraft, but are also for mixed fleets and are built on the knowledge
and expertise of Navtech.
The products support both civil and military environments, on the
ground or on board any aircraft. Following the same product philosophy,
N-Tracking has been developed to track any aircraft, regardless
of the manufacturer.
* See glossary
95#TSAF
41
N-Tracking for flights
Tracking and recording for flight analysis
N-Tracking displays the flight plan and tracks the aircraft’s position against it. It is highly
compatible with N-Flight Planning from NAVBLUE’s N-Software services family.
N-Tracking is capable of reading flight plans in XML format (standard ARINC633).
A key feature of this application is that it records and plays back an aircraft’s actual
flight path taken against its planned path, thus helping airlines to capture valuable fleet
performance information for later reporting and analysis (either in CSV or TXT format).
A historical display of the aircraft’s previous positions can also be viewed with the click
of a button. N-Tracking’s Collaborative
Decision Making (CDM) module
Real-time updates and decision-making module
N-Tracking automatically downloads NOTAM*, TAF* and METAR information. Landed flights
It checks NOTAMs in real-time and whenever a current flight is affected by a NOTAM Inbound flights not landed
update, a notification will be displayed to indicate that the flight watcher or dispatcher yet – landing demand below
airport capacity
should check and possibly take actions regarding this NOTAM (for example, ILS*
unserviceable, or runway closed). Inbound flights scheduled
– landing demand below
NAVBLUE incorporated a Collaborative Decision Making (CDM) module. The CDM is a airport capacity
true decision support platform that provides web-based access to operational data to Inbound flights scheduled
improve operational efficiency. It does this by providing a configurable look ahead at – landing demand exceeding
airport capacity: holding and
the airlines’ flight operations for a particular airline hub. It enables an airline to estimate
flight delay expected
the expected holding time per hour (average, maximum and total), based on the
Inbound flights not landed yet
current capacity at the airport. A simple action that can be taken by the flight opera-
– landing demand exceeding
tions team is to instruct the pilot (via the chat function) to reduce the aircraft’s cruising airport capacity: holding and
speed in response to airport congestion. Additionally, if identified far enough in advance, flight delay expected
the aircraft’s fuel can be adjusted accordingly to account for specific holding durations.
Recording and replaying a flight with N-Tracking
* See glossary
95#TSAF
51
N-Tracking for flights
Features: Flight attributes: CDM (Airport related information):
• Aircraft position display (Map) • Aircraft identification • NOTAM
• Flight list • Aircraft type • Weather information (TAF/METAR)
• User alerts • Departure airport • Runway information
• Aircraft chat • Arrival airport • Average taxi time
• Weather information • Estimated time of arrival • Capacity information for the
airline selected airport(s)
• Airport information • Position report information
(latitude, longitude, altitude)
• Recording and replay capability
• Time of last position report
• Flight plan information merge
CONCLUSION
N-Tracking, with its utilisation of both ADS-B and ACARS data, offers a simple,
cost-effective flight tracking application that enables airlines to comply with future ICAO requirements.
On top of this, it also offers powerful airport capacity intelligence via the CDM Module.
*GLOSSARY
ACARS - Aircraft Communications Addressing and Reporting System
ADS-B - Automatic Dependent Surveillance–Broadcast
AIRMET - Airmen’s Meteorological Information
ETA - Estimated Time of Arrival
FIR - Flight Information Region
FlightRadar24 - Live flight tracker that shows air traffic in real time
FlySmart - A set of hardware and software that optimises operations through flight operations,
maintenance, ground and cabin solutions used onboard aircraft.
ILS - Instrument Landing System
METAR - Meteorological Terminal Aviation Routine Weather Report
Navtech
A leading global provider of flight operations solutions, acquired by Airbus in December 2015
and now integrated in NAVBLUE.
NOTAM - Notice to Airmen
PIREPs - Pilot Reports
ROPS - Runway Overrun Prevention System
Services by Airbus
A business unit within Airbus’ Customer Services operation, bringing a more integrated
approach for worldwide operators and reinforcing the company’s service offering.
Areas of focus include flight hour packages; material services; flight operations; training;
upgrades for cabin, airframe and systems; digitalisation.
SIGMET - Significant Meteorological Information
TAF - Terminal Aerodrome Forecast
95#TSAF
61
Transferring aircraft
between operators
Key factors for successful handovers
Transferring an aircraft to a new operator requires numerous steps with the
involvement of several stakeholders. Detailed preparation and coordination are key
factors to ensure a successful handover in a timely and cost efficient manner.
Although the industrial setup can be prepared in advance, it requires the utmost
attention at all stages, as each and every aircraft transfer has its own specificities
and/or difficulties.
With its sound industrial setup and procedures for aircraft transfers, Airbus can
ease the process by offering tailored solutions adapted to its different customers.
Article by (left to right)
Erick CIRILLO
Director, Embodiment Operations
AIRBUS
Emmanuel RAHM
Fleet Manager Embodiment Operations
AIRBUS
Aurélien PERSON
Fleet Manager Embodiment Operations
AIRBUS
turnkey.services@airbus.com
Transferring aircraft between operators
95#TSAF
71
Contributing stakeholders
Different stakeholders who may be involved in a transfer include the aircraft owner,
the previous operator, a maintenance organisation, paint shops for livery change,
Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisations (CAMOs), the service bulletin
provider, the next operator’s planning and engineering department, and the
relevant airworthiness authorities. Ideally, these stakeholders need to work on the
aircraft transfer in a very limited time frame, the common goal being to get the
aircraft back into operational service, with its new operator, as soon as possible.
(read more about CAMOs and MROs on page 19).
Operator Operator
A B
Aircraft
transfer
Aircraft Implementation
Delivery of
technical of technical
the aircraft
assessment requirements
Aircraft
Maintenance due
records Airworthiness
as per contract requirements
review review
- and - Configuration
New livery
changes
Aircraft Export
Certificate
physical
Aircraft of
inspection Check flight* Ground check Airworthiness
Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisation (CAMO)
Aircraft storage before delivery
The procedure timeline *Check flight
The aircraft transfer procedure starts with a physical inspection of the Often an airworthiness authority will
aircraft and of its records supplied by operator A. The aim is to ensure require that the next operator carries
that the aircraft meets contractual conditions and airworthiness out a Check flight prior to the aircraft
requirements. being registered in the importing
country. This check is also part of most
During the next phase, the aircraft may undergo configuration changes
contractual re-delivery conditions to the
relating, for example, to livery, cabin or systems upgrades. At the same
next operator.
time, maintenance checks are carried out, in line with delivery contractual
requirements. The CAMO manages the airworthiness of the aircraft and The purpose of a Check flight is to test
issues the work orders to the MRO, updating the aircraft records the aircraft’s systems, cabin, and
accordingly. In-Flight Entertainment in real
conditions, observing their behaviour
Upon the MRO release of this work package, the aircraft is tested on
and recording parameters.
ground and in flight. The airworthiness review is conducted to obtain
the Export Certificate of Airworthiness. If these parameters are in their nominal
range, the aircraft is technically
During the delivery process to operator B, the aircraft and its records
acceptable.
are inspected again, to ensure that they match re-delivery conditions.
Transferring aircraft between operators
Assessing the aircraft’s technical status
Implementing technical requirements
Due maintenance
The aircraft must be prepared to meet the contractual return/delivery conditions.
This may include completing scheduled maintenance tasks, airworthiness
directives, service bulletins, and defect rectifications.
Configuration changes and new livery
In preparation for the aircraft transition for the next operator, cabin changes may
be needed. These may go from simple carpet and seat cover replacement to a full
reconfiguration including seats, galley changes, seating capacity certification,
and even IFE replacement.
The minimum configuration change for the next operator is a new external livery
and systems upgrades to meet regional regulations, but very often this also includes
cabin upgrades in order to rebrand the cabin interior.
To comply with airworthiness regulations, these configuration modifications need
to be developed by a DOA Part 21 J organisation able to produce service bulletins,
along with a DOA Part 21 G organisation that is able to manufacture the kits and
parts needed for the modifications. Last-minute changes being quite common, The Design Organisation
it is advisable to have a flexible set of solutions prepared.
It is in charge of the engineering and
The pre-requisite for developing these modifications is a good knowledge of certification of the aircraft modifications,
the aircraft configuration and control of the pre-modification aircraft status. including cabin, systems and avionics. Airbus
This encompasses both the configuration when the aircraft left the production line, holds a Design Organisation Approval (DOA)
as well as the list of modifications embodied by the previous operator(s) since the and is recognised as complying with the
aircraft was manufactured. Configuration changes are reported to Airbus by requirements of Part 21 Subpart J.
operators and MROs throughout the aircraft’s life.
Check flight and Ground check
When the next customer is identified, contractual requirements generally demand
that the aircraft be inspected and tested, both on the ground and in flight. This is
to ensure that the aircraft complies with the delivery conditions of the next customer
and the aircraft systems and engines are performing as expected.
95#TSAF
81
Aircraft physical inspection Review of aircraft records
The aircraft physical inspection takes place during the Aircraft records must be checked against airworthiness and contractual
re-delivery check and at operator A’s location and ensures requirements.
that the aircraft meets its contractual requirements.
For an aircraft which has accumulated many years of operation, the
Among others, this visual inspection checks:
volume of records in paper format can be as much as 15m3, weighing
• Items beyond normal wear and tear in the cabin, several tons. As each operator has its own way of working, the records
any fuel or hydraulic leaks can come in different languages, forms and means. In addition, the way
the records are sorted differs widely from one operator to another.
• That brakes and tyres are not worn beyond contractual
The task of checking records usually takes place at the previous operator’s
provisions
premises, or at the MRO location. In both cases, it often involves travel
• That structural repairs are reported in the aircraft records and several weeks at the on-site location. For operators not equipped with
dedicated teams for aircraft returns, this can represent a significant
• That part numbers and serial numbers are identical
workload which comes in addition to the day-to-day activity of a
to those listed in the aircraft records (by sampling)
maintenance control centre and planning and engineering department.
The physical inspection protocols highlight equipment to
Despite the constraints involved, this paperwork is of paramount
be visually checked in every aircraft area, thus avoiding the
importance as it provides evidence of all maintenance interventions on
possibility of overlooking or duplicating an inspection item.
a given aircraft since its initial delivery from the Final Assembly Line.
All discrepancies are added to a Defect Item List that is
These records are then used as the basis for the physical inspection
delivered to the operator for rectification by the MRO.
to check if the aircraft corresponds. They also form part of the supporting
documents required when applying for a Certificate of Airworthiness
and must be complete and accurate, as any shortfall may delay the
issuance of the certificate for the next operator.
95#TSAF
91
Transferring aircraft between operators
Delivering the aircraft
During the implementation of the technical requirements and the configuration updating,
all stakeholders are under pressure to get the aircraft into operational service with its new
operator as soon as possible. Interruptions in these steps may delay the aircraft delivery
planning and have a significant financial impact on one or more of the stakeholders.
The delivery phase of the aircraft to operator B encompasses activities including aircraft
inspection by operator B and its airworthiness authorities, Check flight, airworthiness
review and final touch-ups as required.
Very often, the pressure on the project team reaches a peak at the delivery phase.
This is when the real benefit of anticipating and coordinating is most keenly felt.
Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisation Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul organisation
CAMO
The role of the The role of the MRO
during aircraft transfer during aircraft transfer
The continuing airworthiness activities for an aircraft in Maintenance organisations are key players in aircraft
transition are different from those required for an aircraft transfers. It is these organisations that physically prepare
in operation. The responsibility for managing the airworthi- the aircraft for its next operational life. The maintenance
ness of the aircraft is taken from the previous operator organisation can be either the operator’s MRO or any
and the CAMO must be able to quickly identify all contracted MRO with the appropriate rating. In both
maintenance actions necessary to maintain and control cases, a close relationship and monitoring of progress
the airworthiness of the aircraft, until its re-delivery. against the aircraft transfer planning is essential.
Changes to this planning could have repercussions on
the operating start date of the next operator.
CAMO Part M Subpart G & I regulation
For an aircraft in operation, maintenance checks are
Since September 2008, all air transport aircraft registered under a scheduled some time in advance, and unscheduled
European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) member state have to be maintenance or additional tasks are anticipated in the
managed by a CAMO*. This includes commercial as well as schedule to minimise turnaround time.
non-commercial aircraft (parked, stored or corporate jets).
Unlike scheduled maintenance inputs while the aircraft
The Continuing Airworthiness Management Organisation (CAMO) is in operation, the work package for an aircraft to be
must demonstrate to the authority (EASA or their National Aviation transferred is the basic work package, plus a variable
Authorities (NAA)) that they are continuously compliant with all amount of additional work that may be required during
relevant rules for the concerned scope, and then the authority may the transfer phase. This additional work is driven by the
grant and maintain an approval to the organisation. next operator’s requirements or findings during the
acceptance checks, the requirements of the airworthi-
Part M Subpart G - CAMO
ness authorities, or the configuration change.
The Part M Subpart G defines all activities to be undertaken
In some cases, the aircraft’s operational availability is
by a CAMO organisation,
disrupted for several weeks by maintenance and
• Definition of pre-flight inspections conversion. However, in the case of a leased aircraft
• Rectification of defect and damage (MEL, CDL) there may be an additional delay if the lessor does not
• Compliance with an approved maintenance programme yet have a new lessee. In this event, the aircraft is stored
• Analysis of maintenance programme effectiveness at an MRO, or any suitable location where an MRO has
• Embodiment of airworthiness directives and Service Bulletins access to it.
• Approval of repairs
The management of work performed by the MRO during
• Definition of a modification policy
the transfer phase is key to keeping the planning under
• Check flight procedures
control. This involves resource allocation and work
package preparation, but also implementing ways of
Part M Subpart I - Airworthiness Review Certificates (ARC)
working with all the stakeholders present on the MRO
The Part M Subpart I defines the requirement for an approved premises at the same time.
organisation to issue Airworthiness Review Certificates, and the
issuance of Certificates of Airworthiness (CofA) and Export CofA.
*Airbus is a certified CAMO since 16/04/2009
Transferring aircraft between operators
Airbus aircraft transfer solutions
With its robust industrial setup and efficient procedures, Airbus can facilitate
the transfer for customers by being their single point of contact.
The Airbus transfer service coordinates stakeholders and manages part or all
of the process, including planning & resource management and technical & Airbus has been a certified
airworthiness activities. This customizable service agreement offers end-to- CAMO since 2009
end accountability for the transfer until final aircraft delivery.
Aircraft records Configuration changes
and physical inspection Configuration changes to an aircraft are reported to Airbus throughout
its life. This data is key in determining modifications and drawings required
To ease the burden of collating aircraft records, Airbus can set
to go from a pre-modification to a post-modification aircraft. This aircraft
up an IT system with the previous operator, which is usually
configuration database helps reduce engineering studies and avoid
web-based, for remote access to the records. The system
last-minute adjustments or corrections, although it is still necessary
requires the scanning of all paper records, with Optical
to check the accuracy of the data reported.
Character Recognition capability enabling searches by
keywords wherever possible. This feature helps retrieve In addition, pre-modification studies may come from several aircraft at the
evidence of accomplished tasks such as airworthiness same time, to create a single post-modification configuration. This can be
directives, service bulletins and repairs. helpful when, for example, several aircraft come from different operators
and regulatory environments, but will eventually be operated by a single
The previous operator’s planning & engineering department
operator after the transfers.
then receives the list of deviations from contractual and/or
airworthiness requirements which must be answered and/or Airbus is able to propose, for each aircraft, a tailored package of modifica-
rectified in almost real time. This way of working with a tions to arrive at the definition requested by the next operator/customer.
web-based, remote-access IT system, especially on a difficult
transfer, offers a win-win situation for all teams. Livery change
The physical inspection protocols are customized taking into Airbus helps reduce livery change/painting time, thus aircraft downtime,
account the aircraft age, environment, and operating conditions. with the development of graphic tools (see FAST #56 August 2015 edition).
The list of discrepancies raised by the physical inspection are Airbus livery solutions reduce aircraft grounding time by about 20%
compiled in a electronic file, with a picture, location of the defect compared to traditional methods, with Mylar™ decals and adhesive
& technical proposition for its resolution by the MRO. The file is stencils to save time at the plotting-out stage.
shared on a collaborative platform, and the evolution of snag
The result is that any paint shop can attain Airbus’ final assembly line
rectification can be monitored by the project stakeholders,
quality, and the livery toolkit delivered allows a repeatable process
whether they are in situ or not.
and results.
The Airbus CAMO can adapt its activity specifically for aircraft transitions.
The Airbus CAMO has The Subpart I privilege During the transfer To save approbation time, The Airbus CAMO
been granted Part M allows Airbus to perform phase, the Airbus the Airbus CAMO has been can arrange for the
Subpart G & I airworthiness reviews, CAMO provides a authorised, as Original issuance of a permit
privileges on the entire renew Airworthiness temporary registra- Equipment Manufacturer, by to fly, with Airbus
range of Airbus civil Review Certificates or tion mark for each the airworthiness authority to DOA Part 21
models. apply for Certificates of aircraft under its issue and approve the mainte- privilege.
Airworthiness for Export. jurisdiction. nance programme under its
own approval process.
Check flight Delivery
The aircraft is tested on ground and in flight in accordance with the In Service Aircraft In accordance with the service agreement,
Test Flight Manual (ISATFM) protocol and flight profile. These flights are carried out by Airbus can remain accountable and the
Airbus flight test pilots. The Flight Test Completion Certificate is issued once the ground single point of contact until final delivery
and flight tests have been passed. of the aircraft to operator B.
95#TSAF
02
95#TSAF
12
Transferring aircraft between operators
Lessors article by
Airbus aircraft transfer solutions
Alberto ORTEGA DIAZ
- upgrades for lessors Upgrades Sales Director
AIRBUS
alberto.ortega@airbus.com
The challenges of aircraft transfer are keenly felt by lessors, even more so
with the increasing number of leased aircraft and operator transitions. Marc
TEMBLEQUE-VILALTA
Simple, flexible and efficient transitions are major considerations in the lessor
Upgrades Sales Director
business model. A key player is the Design Organisation which engineers and
AIRBUS
certifies the aircraft modifications required to transfer the aircraft.
Leasing institutions have now been part of the commercial aviation landscape for
many years. The aircraft transition is the most critical part of the aircraft life from a
lessor perspective, so it is important that the right services are available to support the
process. The main criteria are remarketing visibility early in the process, flexibility and
short lead-times during the transfer preparation phase, and reliable deliveries during
the working party operation. Simple, quick, predictable aircraft transfers are para-
mount to the success of any aircraft type.
The lessor needs to consider the customization options for aircraft transfer at the end
of a lease term and may carefully study the financial implications of the available
options before the end-of-lease date for every possible remarketing scenario. Prior to
any aircraft remarketing activity, a thorough understanding of this financial impact is
required.
Except for lease-return maintenance checks, which will happen regardless of who the
next lessee is, most of these expenses are linked to aircraft modifications, which can
originate from regional regulations or from specific operational and functional require-
ments of the next lessee.
Remarketing support services
To assist in understanding the financial implications of transition options, Airbus can
provide a Remarketing Study that lists the mandatory modifications required should
the aircraft be registered under an authority that follows EASA or FAA rules, as well as
Russia or China. The list includes an assessment of the current aircraft configuration
and is available to provide price and lead-time figures for A320 and A330/A340 fleets.
To ensure a successful transition the Lessor takes into account the operational needs
of potential lessees. An important aspect is the ability to match the payload/range
characteristics of aircraft and routes. This may mean that an adjustment in the aircraft
maximum operating weights is required which also can incur a financial impact. Clear
visibility of the past and current configuration is key to predict the price of any aircraft
weight modification.
It is therefore crucial for lessors to have a clear visibility of their fleet’s current and
historic maximum operating weights as this impacts the actual payload/range capabili-
ties and the aircraft asset value. Having this visibility also helps predict the transition
costs well in advance, in case a change in the weight becomes a requirement by the
next lessee. Airbus can deliver an Aircraft Operating Weight Report (AOWR) for the
lessors’ fleet, as part of the transition support services portfolio. The remarketing
report and the AOWR, together with transfer packages, can be used to analyse the
viability of current or future transactions.
95#TSAF
22
Transferring aircraft between operators
Upgrades for lessors
Engineering Materials Transition Logistics
support services
• FAST TRACK • Modification kits • Consolidated
Systems SB • Remarketing studies Service
• Supplier Furnished
Logistics (CSL)
• Airframe SB Equipment (SFE) • Aircraft Operating
material Weight Reports • Material
• Cabin SB
consolidation
• Airbus SFE seats • Transfer services
• Certification and storage
• Second-hand parts • ACM+: extended service
• Livery service
Aircraft Configuration
Matrix
More agility and flexibility for systems and airframe upgrades
Changes in the country of aircraft registration or the current airworthiness landscape Flexible Fleet SBs - Up to 50% lower
can also trigger the requirement for configuration changes in the aircraft avionics and lead-time by ordering engineering
systems, for example water conduction freezing protection for Russian operations in advance
or Fuel Tank Inerting System (FTIS) for aircraft registered in the United States.
Under the Flexible Fleet SBs process, lessors
The pressure on lessors to quickly adapt the aircraft to these requirements is clear
can purchase an upfront engineering study for
and therefore the rapid availability of Service Bulletins (SB) and kits is crucial.
an upgrade on a particular fleet. Airbus uses
A FAST TRACK SB service is available to cut the SB lead-times for selected products this study to work on a modification before
which are typical requirements in the frame of lease transitions. These include regional releasing the SB or the kit. This approach
mandates that are sometimes in the critical path for aircraft transition: from changing enables Airbus to deliver a short and
cockpit units from imperial to metric, to installing a dual ice detector or an ozone guaranteed lead-time for SB issuance and kit
converter, the lead-time of the overall upgrade development becomes shorter which delivery once the concrete list of MSNs is
results in enabling short-term aircraft remarketing opportunities. Upgrade parts in the confirmed. It can also lead to economies of
frame of the FAST TRACK service are now available in stock for certain products so scale when compared to single recurrent
that shipment lead-time for parts is even shorter. orders.
As with all Upgrade Services, this offer
includes the Airbus standard documentation
Solutions for more cabin efficiency
package and update of the Airbus
During the period of a long term lease contract, new market trends and technology configuration database.
can create new needs; this is especially true for the aircraft cabin. The transition
Flexible Fleet SBs offer more flexibility,
may offer an opportunity to transform the aircraft into a more re-marketable product.
more visibility over costs, and shorter lead
As an example, an increase in the maximum certified seating capacity on the
times for the lease transition, all with
A320 Family has become a selectable option in the last few years.
minimum upfront costs.
Seats are also usually in the critical path for cabin reconfiguration. In order to ensure
lead times, Airbus has entered into an agreement with a seat supplier to guarantee
quick delivery of specific seats for the A320 family. These elements are designed to
simplify and speed up the transition process with shorter delivery lead-times and
increased flexibility. Additionally, nose-to-tail turnkey packaged solutions covering
different aircraft transition programmes are available.
Packaging not only concerns the actual aircraft modification SB or parts, but also
everything around it. Airbus can provide consolidated material shipping services, and
also design customized shipping solutions for lessors. Responsibility over logistics can
be transferred to Airbus with a daily link highlighting shipping status and information for
all ordered material. During the working party intervention, several shipments of parts
may arrive at the MRO location from different places, at different times, making it
difficult to ensure installation on time. For this reason, the kit consolidation service
presents a significant advantage by ensuring that parts arrive in a single shipment
at the MRO, thus simplifying tracking of the material.
CONCLUSION
Aircraft transfer from one operator to another can be a long and complex operation involving
technical, contractual, economic and regulatory constraints. To ensure a time-efficient and
cost-effective transfer, the stakeholders such as the CAMO, the Part 145 and the service
bulletin providers need to work on the same agenda. The thorough coordination of these
stakeholders, as well as of the previous and next operators, the aircraft owner and the
airworthiness authorities, is key.
To support these transfers, Airbus Embodiment Operations offers end-to-end turnkey
solutions which can be tailored to each aircraft, covering all or part of the transition process,
from initial assessment to delivery.
For the specific needs of lessors, Airbus Upgrade Services facilitates decision-making
regarding configurations and financial costs, and provides solutions to simplify and
accelerate transfers.
Contact turnkey.services@airbus.com for further information about Airbus’ aircraft transfer solutions.
95#TSAF
32
Transferring aircraft between operators
Livery change
Airbus has created dedicated livery
design and masking systems that
reduce aircraft downtime
(see FAST #56 August 2015 edition).
9955##TTSSAAFF
4432
Staying on line
Eliminating unwanted offset
from the steering system
Aircraft veering phenomenon
is described as the aircraft’s
deviation during taxi operations.
To correct these deviations,
Airbus has over the years
implemented solutions for
each of the three main causes
of abnormal veering:
• Steering demand offset
• Servo valve offset
Article by • Rotary Variable Differential
Transducer (RVDT) offset
Laurent COUTURET
Braking and Steering System Senior Engineer
Product Leader A380 & A300/A310
AIRBUS
laurent.couturet@airbus.com
Offset Offset
Steering-By-Wire
The use of ‘Steering-By-Wire’, compared to the former hydro-mechanical
architecture using mechanical cables and pulleys, has made it possible to
reduce aircraft weight whilst ensuring a better integration of the steering system
with other aircraft systems such as Auto-Pilot for Auto Land and improving
maintenance through the on-board Central Maintenance System.
‘Steering-By-Wire’ was first introduced on A320 aircraft and has evolved over
the past decades for continuous reliability and operation enhancement.
95#TSAF
52
Staying on line
What is veering?
Steering handwheel (tiller)
Veering is a progressive tendency of the aircraft to steer to the right or left of the
taxiway (or runway) centreline, without steering inputs from flight crew (i.e. steering
handwheels, rudder pedals and rudder trim all at neutral position). It is most
noticeable during taxiing at low speeds.
Note: Veering is not a sudden swerve movement of nose wheels.
Instances of aircraft veering have been reported, requiring sometimes extensive
trouble shooting actions to fix the issue. Flight crew may need to correct using the
steering handwheel or rudder trim to taxi the aircraft in a straight line.
When the correction exceeds the threshold, a maintenance action is required to find
the cause of this veering tendency.
Finding the cause
Abnormal veering can be due to either internal or external factors. This article will focus
on the internal factors in relation to the steering system.
The Nose Wheel Steering (NWS) system architecture is based on a computer acquiring
cockpit inputs to calculate the steering order. This order is compared to the actual
position of the nose wheels (nose wheels’ angle measured by the Rotary Variable
Differential Transducer (RVDT)) to calculate and generate a current to the servo valve.
NWS system principle:
- For the A320 Family and A330 Family, the computer is the Braking and Steering
Control Unit (BSCU)
- For the A350 XWB, the computers are the Core Processing Input Output Module
(CPIOM) and Common Remote Data Concentrator (CDRC)
- For the A380, the computer is the Core Processing Input Output Module (CPIOM)
Rudder pedals
Correction thresholds
Nose wheel angle offset within tolerance if ≤ 0.5°
A320 A330 A340 A340 A350 A380
RT 200/300 500/600 RT ≤ 2.9° RT ≤ 2.5°
≤ 3.0° RT ≤ (*) RT ≤ 2.5°
Max. Max. Max. Max. Max.
allowed allowed allowed allowed allowed
RT RT RT RT RT
≤ 8.8° ≤ (**) ≤ 10° ≤ 11.6° ≤ 10°
Rudder Trim (RT) correction greater than above values triggers maintenance action
Rudder Trim (RT) correction greater than above values = NO DISPATCH
* = 3.0° with electrical rudder control ** = 10.4° with electrical rudder control
RT - Rudder Trim
= 3.5° with mechanical rudder control = 12° with mechanical rudder control
95#TSAF
62
Staying on line
The solutions implemented to correct veering
From the above architecture it can be determined that three
typical offsets can lead to abnormal aircraft veering tendency:
1 Steering demand offset generating unwanted steering order
while in neutral position
2 Servo valve offset generating hydraulic flow and steering
the nose wheels away from neutral position
3 RVDT* offset shifting the electrical zero position vs. zero
mechanical position of nose wheels
Steering demand
offset correction
In order to account for small undesirable cockpit inputs possibly
leading to unwanted steering order, a dead band (or flat zone)
has been introduced in the control loop.
The principle is to move from the green curve (linear law starting
from 0 degrees to output a steering order) to the blue curve
zeroing small inputs prior to generating a steering order.
This new control law is implemented in the avionics part of the
steering system for the A320 Family, A330 Family, A350 XWB
and A380.
0
Steering order
tupni
tipkcoC
AP
Pilot and First Officer Pilot and First Officer Autopilot
rudder pedals handwheels
*RVDT - Rotary Variable Differential Transducer
STEERING SOFTWARE
1 Steering
1 2 3 demand
offset
correction
3
Summation HCF
Heading Control
Function
Integrator
2
RVDT
Rotary Variable
Differential
Transducer
95#TSAF
72
Staying on line
Servo valve offset correction
The steering servo valve provides hydraulic flow as a function of current. This means
that the current is based on the difference between the steering commanded order
and the actual position of nose wheels. When the position of the nose wheels is equal
to the steering commanded order the current sent to the servo valve is null. With a null
current there is no hydraulic flow and the nose wheels hold the requested position.
An offset (or drift) of the servo valve may cause hydraulic flow leading to nose wheels
steering movement with a neutral commanded order. The steering movement of the
nose wheels is fed back to the avionics (angle measured by RVDT), which sends
a current to the servo valve in the opposite direction of the nose wheels movement.
When the current sent to the servo valve corresponds to a hydraulic balanced
position with no flow, the nose wheels hold the new position but are not aligned
with the steering order, hence aircraft veering tendency.
Depending on the servo valve drift, a permanent offset will take place.
This offset may require flight crew correction to re-centre the nose wheels.
In order to enhance the Nose Wheel Steering system operation, the steering control
loop was modified to compensate for small servo valve offset. To this end, an extra
current called integrator is sent to the servo valve allowing the nose wheels to
progressively recover the steering commanded order.
The new control loop with the integrator is implemented in the avionics part
of the steering system of the A330 Family, A350 XWB and A380.
This solution can also be implemented on the A320 Family after activation
of a dedicated pin-programming.
RVDT offset correction
The RVDT provides an electrical signal as a function of the nose wheel angle position.
An offset between the mechanical position of nose wheels and the electrical signal
sent by the RVDT may cause abnormal veering tendency with the NWS system
seeking the electrical zero position of the RVDT.
In order to account for small RVDT offset, the steering control loop has been modified
to monitor the aircraft heading and maintain a target heading.
This function, called Heading Control Function (HCF), is implemented in the avionics
part of the steering system of the A350 XWB and A380.
Note: The HCF also contributes to reducing flight crew workload during taxi
operations by compensating deviation possibly resulting from external factors such
as crosswind or taxiway/runway slope.
tesffo
SWN
Integrator action
+0,6°
+0,4°
+0,2°
0°
-0,2°
+0 +0.5 +1 +1.5 +2 +2.5 +3 +3.5 +4
Time (s)
Offset BEFORE Offset AFTER
integrator action integrator action
tesffo
SWN
+0,6°
+0,4°
+0,2° Permanent NWS offset
0°
-0,2°
+0 +0.5 +1 +1.5 +2 +2.5 +3 +3.5 +4
Time (s)
tesffo
SWN
Integrator action
+0,6°
+0,4°
+0,2°
0°
-0,2°
+0 +0.5 +1 +1.5 +2 +2.5 +3 +3.5 +4
Time (s)
Offset BEFORE Offset AFTER
integrator action integrator action
tesffo
SWN
1 2 3
AP
Pilot and First Officer Pilot and First Officer Autopilot
rudder pedals handwheels
+0,6°
+0,4°
STEERING SOFTWARE
+0,2° Permanent NWS offset
0°
-0,2°
+0 +0.5 +1 +1.5 +2 +2.5 +3 +3.5 +4
1 Steering
Time (s)
demand
offset
correction
3
Summation HCF
Heading Control
Function
Integrator
2
RVDT
Rotary Variable
Differential
Transducer
1 2 3
95#TSAF
82
Staying on line
In the event of aircraft veering tendency exceeding the
tolerance, and irrespective of aircraft configuration, the
troubleshooting manual provides instructions to isolate the
cause of the deviation (internal or external factor). To this end,
it may be necessary to verify if the adjustment of the RVDT is
aligned with the aircraft centreline.
Correct and accurate mechanical adjustment of the RVDT is a
key factor to prevent abnormal veering tendency due to large
offset between the actual position of the nose wheels and the
feedback sent by the RVDT.
Basically, the adjustment of the RVDT is to be carried out
when the nose wheels are aligned with aircraft centreline.
Several procedures can be used to align the nose wheels prior
to adjusting the RVDT. Operators can adapt their maintenance
depending on the aircraft programme, tool and time available
to do the RVDT adjustment.
Summary
Depending on the aircraft programme and avionics architecture,
the NWS system was modified to accommodate the new
functions.
Forward fit Retrofit
Aircraft
New control law Integrator Heading control function New control law Integrator Heading control function
A318 Yes No No N/A On request* No
A319 Yes No No N/A On request* No
A320 Yes No No N/A On request* No
A321 Yes No No N/A On request* No
A330 Yes Yes No N/A N/A No
A340 Yes Yes No N/A N/A No
A350 Yes Yes Yes N/A N/A No
A380 Yes Yes Yes N/A N/A No
(*) Upon request Airbus Upgrade Services will review the aircraft configuration
Maintenance and operational procedures have been adapted and propose a Service Bulletin to activate the integrator.
to account for small and acceptable offset whilst providing
clear instructions for maximum allowable limits and trouble-
shooting activities.
Note: In-Service Information (ISI) ref. 32.51.00004 and
32.51.00005 (A320 Family and A330 Family respectively) was
issued to provide guidance during troubleshooting actions.
CONCLUSION
The NWS system has evolved over the years to limit the occurrence of abnormal aircraft veering.
The solutions implemented also improve ground control and reduce flight crew workload.
Operational and maintenance guidelines are available for operators in the event of aircraft veering
tendency to better understand the source of the problem and apply the best solution.
For more significant veering phenomena, other tools and troubleshooting actions are at the disposal
of the operators.
Operators can also improve their knowledge on veering troubleshooting actions as well as
the use of the Laser Alignment Tool with an engineering workshop available in the Airbus catalogue.
95#TSAF
92
Staying on line
egatireH
etaroproC
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
sotohP
FAST
from the past
There wouldn’t be any future At the beginning of civil aviation, when there
without the experience of the past. was little competition between airlines,
turnaround time was maybe not a major priority.
Today, ground handling staff still need to clean,
check and maintain the aircraft and load cargo
with the greatest of care, but the stakes are
now much higher for airlines (see The ground
handling challenge article, page 04).
95#TSAF
03
95#TSAF
34
Around the clock, around the world
Airbus has more than 300 field representatives, based in over 130 cities
Technical, Material & Logistics
USA/CANADA Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas:
Tel: +1 703 834 3484 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +1 703 834 3464 Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500 Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
airtac@airbus.com ifd.spares@airbus.com
CHINA
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 Spares AOG/Work Stoppage Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas:
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162 • Outside the Americas: Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001 Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011 hmv.spares@airbus.com
ADMINISTRATION aog.spares@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936 Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
• In the Americas:
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964 Please contact your dedicated customer spares
Tel: +1 70 3729 9000
account representative
Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
csr.na@airbus.com
aog.na@airbus.com
Training centres
Airbus Training Centre Airbus Training Centre Americas Training by Airbus Jakarta
Toulouse, France Miami, Florida - U.S.A. antoine.renaud@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 82 24 Tel: +1 (305) 871-3655 (switchboard)
or +33 (0)5 61 93 39 75 Fax: +1 305 871 4649 Airbus Asia Training Centre Singapore
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094 miamicustomertrainingsales@airbus.com Tel: +65 6877 4300 (reception)
training.commercial@airbus.com contact.info.aatc@airbus.com
customercare.atc-europe@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Beijing
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 - 3017/3016 Airbus Mexico Training Centre
Airbus Maintenance + 86 10 80 48 65 Tel: +52 55 57 86 80 50
Training Centre (communication and marketing)
Hamburg, Germany Airbus Training Centre Bangalore training.commercial@airbus.com
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288 Tel: 91-080-6638230 (reception)
Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8598 Training by Airbus Korea,
training.commercial@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Delhi Seoul, South Korea
atc.hamburg@airbus.com Tel: +91 9880065511 Tel: +82 (0)32 882 5425
andrew.rapson@airbuskorea.com
Training by Airbus Dubai,
UAE - Airbus Middle East FZE Dubai
Tel: +971 4 602 78 62
mary-knoll.garcia@airbus.com
95#TSAF
13
How can I keep my
business flying?
Ask for Services by Airbus.
Our expertise and innovation
ensure your aircraft is kept to
the highest standards of safety,
productivity and efficiency
for years to come.
Airbus is the answer.
airbus.com
© AIRBUS, 2017. All rights reserved. Airbus, its logo and the product names are registered trademarks.
Data:Users:drolfe:Desktop:12186_AIR_QA_Services_Master_297x210_1.2
KROWTRA
12186_AIR_QA_Services_Master_297x210_1.2.indd 1 17/02/2017 14:56
12186_AIR_QA_Services_Master_297x210_1.2 johnsp
297 x 210 mm
PMS
3 mm
Master PMS
Page 1 PMS
17 February 2017 2:56 PM PMS
