Airbus technical magazine
October 2018
#62
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Already have the FAST app?
Now get the latest news for customers
via Newsfeed by Airbus.
FAST
Airbus Airbus
by by
FAST and Newsfeed by Airbus apps
are downloadable to your preferred device
Already have the FAST app?
Now get the latest news for customers
via Newsfeed by Airbus.
FAST
Airbus Airbus by by
FAST and Newsfeed by Airbus apps
are downloadable to your preferred device
8102
-
26#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#62
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
A350-900 tail cone
Chief Editor: Deborah BUCKLER Focus on fuel 04
Writing support: Parkinson Stephens Editorial Increasing efficiency
Design: PONT BLEU and reducing emissions
Cover image: Alexandre Doumanjou Lightning 10
Printer: Amadio
and HIRF effects
Monitoring aircraft to ensure
Authorisation for reprinting
FAST magazine articles long-term protection
should be requested by email:
fast.magazine@airbus.com Laminar wings 14
Testing, with pilots in mind
FAST magazine is available on internet
www.aircraft.airbus.com/
Be cool, be efficient 22
support-services/publications/
Better management of air-con
and on tablets or smartphones
on the ground
ISSN 1293-5476
The structural fuel leak 30
challenge
© AIRBUS 2018 All rights reserved. Proprietary document
Detecting and preventing
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of Ultra Long Range 34
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
A350-XWB
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
Extra distance, extra comfort
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements FAST from the past 38
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains, Around the clock, 39
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals around the world
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of Field representatives and training centres
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Corporate Heritage,
Master Films, Hervé Gousset, Philippe Masclet, Benjamin Mouchet, Pierre-Jean Argaud,
Alexandre Doumanjou, Sylvain Ramadier, Pascal Pigeyre, Anthony Pecchi
8102
-
26#TSAF
40
Focus on fuel
Increasing efficiency and reducing emissions
Article by
Nicolas DUVAL
Fuel and Emissions Performance Manager
AIRBUS
nicolas.duval@airbus.com
Emmanuelle AYGAT
Fuel and Emissions Performance Manager
AIRBUS
emmanuelle.aygat@airbus.com
Fuel represents around 40% of an airline’s direct operating costs
and is subject to price volatility like few other overheads. Any reduction
in consumption not only directly improves an airline’s margins but,
equally importantly, brings obvious environmental benefits.
What’s the latest on emissions regulation and how can operators
reduce their carbon intensity?
8102
-
26#TSAF
50
Focus on fxuyezl
Jet fuel was 52% more expensive in May 2018 than it was a
year earlier. That means, according to International Air Transport
Association (IATA) data, that airlines will pay about $40 billion
more for fuel this year than in 2017. Indeed, the industry
organisation has warned that its members’ 2018 profits will be
12% lower than originally forecast, at $33.8 billion, because
of the fuel price spike.
Today’s aircraft such as the Airbus A350 XWB, A320neo and A330neo are far
more efficient than previous models; the latest generation of engines brings
double-digit fuel burn reduction, and incremental aerodynamic improvements
such as Sharklets deliver smaller but regular gains.
However, it is an airline’s entire operating environment and all the actors involved
that contribute most to shaping its efficiency and its fuel consumption.
That environment covers the complete flight cycle, from taxi to final approach,
landing, ground operations, and maintenance.
nollaG
SU
rep
stnec
SU
ni
leuF
teJ
Average prices of jet fuel (US cents/USg) and crude oil (US$/barrel)
220
210
200
190
180
170
160 Jet fuel
150 Crude oil
140
130
$SU
ni
lerraB
liO
edurC
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
Aug
2016
Oct
2016
Dec
2016
Feb
2017
Apr
2017
Jun
2017
Aug
2017
Oct
2017
Dec
2017
Feb
2018
Apr
2018
Jun
2018
Aug
2018
Source: Energy International Agency & Airbus
nollaG
SU
rep
stnec
SU
ni leuF
teJ
Average prices of jet fuel (US cents/USg) and crude oil (US$/barrel)
220
210
200
190
180
170
160 Jet fuel
150 Crude oil
140
130
$SU
ni
lerraB
liO
edurC
75
70
65
60
2% Insurance 55 Finance Fuel
3% Landing
50
42% 6% Navigation 25%
45
Aug
2016
Oct
2016
Dec
2016
Feb
2017
Apr
2017
Jun
2017
Aug
2017
Oct
2017
Dec
2017
Feb
2018
Apr
2018
Jun
2018
Aug
2018
9% Crew Insurance 2%
Source: Energy International Agency & Airbus
Landing 3%
1% Line maintenance
Navigation 6%
8% maintenance
4% maintenance Crew 9%
25% Finance
Direct operating costs
2% Insurance
Fuel 3% Landing
42% 6% Navigation
9% Crew
1% Line maintenance
8% Engine maintenance
4% Airframe maintenance
25% Finance
8102
-
26#TSAF
60
Focus on fuel
2010 2020 2050
1.5% fuel efficiency Carbon neutral -50% CO2 emissions
per year growth compared to 2005
Airbus supports the CORSIA Airbus supports
ATAG* aspirational Airbus supports ATAG, ATAG in this ambitious
objective to achieve ICAO, states and airlines and challenging goal
1.5% fuel efficiency to ensure the successful towards a 2-degree
per year with new implementation of pathway requiring
technologies and the CORSIA scheme significant research,
new aircraft - also contributing investment and policy
Improve fleet
*Air Transport Action Group to capacity building development fuel efficient by
1.5% per year
from now until
2020.
5002 0102 0202 0302 0402 0502
CORSIA and carbon offsetting:
What you need to know
Aircraft engines produce nitrogen oxide, unburnt hydrocarbons, particulates and
noise. Reducing levels of each requires different methods. For example, Airbus
has partnered with British Airways to reduce the noise impact of the A380 around
London Heathrow. They have worked with the thrust and climb angle to reach
higher flight levels sooner on departure, and with the thrust and angle of descent
to stay higher for longer on arrival. The project has seen improvements over some
communities of up to nine decibels on departure and up to two decibels on arrival.
However, this inevitably has an effect on fuel consumption.
As the most well-known of combustion engine emissions, carbon dioxide gets
What is offsetting?
the most attention. A single ton of jet fuel produces just over three tons of CO .
2
To reach civil aviation’s self-imposed aim of stabilising carbon emissions at 2020 Carbon offsetting is simply a way
levels, regulated monitoring and offsetting is acknowledged as compulsory in an for individuals or organisations to
industry where, according to IATA, passenger numbers will almost double between neutralise their proportion of an
2016 and 2035 at a 3.7% compound annual growth rate. aircraft’s carbon emissions on
a particular journey by buying
One pan-national monitoring device is CORSIA – the Carbon Offsetting and
carbon credits on the market
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation. It is a global initiative overseen by
and investing in carbon reduction
ICAO, the International Civil Aviation Organisation. CORSIA will make it compulsory
projects.
for airlines operating international flights to offset their CO production through
2
emission credits on a carbon market fed by sectors seeking to reduce their
emissions.
From 2019, airlines involved in CORSIA will be required to monitor and report their
CO emissions. They should begin preparing compliance from 2018. Although the
2
scheme does not fully enter into effect until the end of 2020, thanks to the
voluntary participation of numerous nations it is estimated that 80% of international CORSIA key dates for airlines
air traffic will be covered by the scheme from 2021. State participation becomes
2018 Prepare compliance
mandatory in 2027.
2019 Monitor, report
Airbus supports ICAO and IATA in building awareness and helping deployment
emissions
of CORSIA among airlines. Through the Sustainable Aviation Engagement
Programme, Airbus already offers help to airlines with the monitoring and reporting 2021 80% international
of emissions to authorities. traffic covered
by scheme
As an example, in December 2017 the Indonesian Directorate General of Civil
Aviation (DGCA) hosted a CORSIA workshop in Yogyakarta in collaboration with 2027 Mandatory
Airbus, Vertis Finance, Garuda Indonesia and with support from ICAO’s Technical participation
Cooperation Bureau. Representatives attended from south-east Asian airlines,
civil aviation authorities and airline associations. The aim was to deliver a concrete
implementation plan to Garuda and DGCA Indonesia to manage and declare the
airline’s CO emissions and offsetting obligations.
2
No action
For more on CORSIA
see the ICAO website Known technology, operations
and infrastructure measures
www.icao.int
Biofuels and additional
new-generation technologies
Economic measures
Net emissions trajectory
‘No actions’ trajectory
Carbon neutral growth
Cap net
emissions from 2020
through carbon
By 2050
neutral growth
aviation carbon -50%
emissions will be
half what they CO2 emissions
were in 2005 indexed to 2005
8102
-
26#TSAF
70
Focus on fuel
Learning to be more fuel efficient
While fuel efficiency recommendations are most effective when tailored to the
particularities of an airline’s fleet and operations, some tools that help reduce
consumption can be universally applied. They are detailed in Airbus’ reference
guide ‘Getting to Grips for Fuel Saving’ whose latest, updated version is planned
by the end of 2018.
‘Getting to Grips’ includes best practices on flight and ground operations;
maintenance task recommendations; information on CORSIA; the role of air traffic
management in fuel saving; sustainable fuels; and details of Airbus’ aftermarket
and upgrade services that offer ‘quick win’ improvements. The upcoming version
has a simplified structure and in 2018 it will cover the A320neo and A380.
The A350 XWB and A330neo will be covered in a subsequent edition.
Quick wins offered by Airbus include single engine taxi without APU, known as
SETWA. SETWA enables an A320ceo aircraft to save up to 25% in fuel burn
compared to two-engine taxiing, with negligible weight increase. It is available
on the A320 Family, A330, A350 XWB and A380.
In addition to the Getting to Grips guide, Airbus hosts yearly fuel savings and
emissions reduction seminars to examine and discuss latest developments and
technologies. In 2018 the event reached its seventh edition. It was attended by
some 160 delegates representing over 50 airlines as well as airports, air navigation
service providers, original equipment manufacturers, environmental bodies,
and fuel producers from across the world.
The seminar is a useful networking opportunity for the fuel efficiency managers,
pilots and flight operations specialists who attend. It emphasises interactivity to
explore and respond to airline needs. Subjects for debate and discussion are
proposed by participants and presenters coming from diverse backgrounds to
share their insight and experience. Areas covered at the 2018 event include using
big data to better manage fuel, new technologies and a focus on ground operations.
The seminar is complemented by twice-yearly webinars that delve into more detail
on the subjects it raises. It revolves around presentations by Airbus experts and
detailed question-and-answer sessions. Participants at the March 2018 webinar
discussed potable water uplift. Airbus and Finnair worked to reduce the amount
of potable water carried on the airline’s fleet, presenting the results during the
June seminar.
Fuel savings & emissions reduction seminar: What the participants say
Operators work with Airbus in a partnership on fuel The value of the fuel seminars lies in sharing ideas to
efficiency. We want the same thing, and can have a overcome obstacles together. Every year the event
frank discussion of what we expect from you. Fuel is allows us to step out of the day-to-day, reflect and
clearly an Airbus priority, and we know we can count gain some perspective. This is especially relevant in
on support when we make changes to our business. fostering culture change around the next generation
of aircraft that come with new fuel saving
The networking during the seminar is very valuable
innovations, techniques and tools.
for meeting your opposite numbers at other airlines.
The participation is very diverse. Swapping tips and Airbus’ information sharing is encouragingly
hints when operations are comparable is great. consistent, as the yearly seminar is complemented
I appreciate the Top Five, when we draw up top by webinars at regular intervals. The fact that you’re
issues for Airbus to address and press you on how listening to operators, that’s the key to great
you will tackle them. Of course the following year we customer support.
can review progress!
Luigi FOFFA Mike PULASKI
Fuel Efficiency Manager, British Airways Engineering, Senior Manager, Fuel Smart, American Airlines
Seminar caucus chairman
Focus on fuel
8102
-
26#TSAF
80
Applying fuel efficiency solutions
Fuel efficiency can be optimised by concentrating on pragmatic continuous
improvement in ground operations, flight operations, and maintenance.
Ground operations Flight operations Maintenance
Several options for so-called ‘green Airbus’ Green Operating Procedures The airframe is a complex shape and
taxiing’ exist, from single engine use highlight how fuel burn can be includes many panels, doors and flight
to hybrid or fully electric manoeuvring. optimized during all phases of flight. control surfaces. In order for the
Ground movements represent about Operators can use them to define their aircraft to perform at its optimum
15 minutes per flight; ‘green’ taxiing own fuel policy as part of a general efficiency - i.e. to create the lowest
can significantly reduce fuel burn during cost reduction policy covering amount of drag - the airframe must be
the phase. Airbus offers three solutions maintenance and operating costs, fuel as free from irregularities as possible.
to improve efficiency – SETWA (see consumption and passenger comfort. This means that surfaces should be as
above), TaxiBot and eTaxi. They deliver Savings can be achieved, for example, smooth as possible, panels and doors
between 25% and 85% fuel savings by using a Ground Electrical or should be flush with surrounding
on the ground compared to standard Pneumatic Unit instead of an Auxiliary structure and all control surfaces
operations, and reducing emissions. Power Unit at the gate, by optimum should be rigged to their specified
flight level during cruise, or by position.
TaxiBot – Single aisle aircraft are towed
optimization of the descent profile.
by a semi-robotic, pilot-controlled In terms of overall airframe condition
vehicle with engines switched off. Air traffic doubles every 15 years, (dents, panel gaps, under or over filled
Modification involves a switch on the raising challenges to safety, reliability panel joints, etc…), particular attention
cockpit centre pedestal, and taxiing fuel and the sustainability of aviation itself. should be paid to areas of the airframe
savings of up to 85% can be achieved To respond to these challenges, the that air impinges on first (e.g. forward
compared to two-engine operations. Airbus subsidiary NAVBLUE develops portion of the fuselage, the nacelles,
TaxiBot is already available for the A320 digital flight operations and air traffic wings, fin, etc).
Family and will be certified for the A330, management solutions which offer
One objective of the maintenance
A350 XWB and A380. major improvements for navigation,
schedule is to preserve the aircraft’s
enhanced operations and savings.
eTaxi - Aircraft can taxi without engines operational efficiency by the most
Extra fuel reserves are used to cover
or without requiring airport tractors or economic means possible. This is
potential uncertainties during flight;
tugs. A significant modification is achieved through inspections, and
however, they increase aircraft
needed to install electric motors in the subsequent repair as necessary, in
operating weight and fuel consumption
main landing gear that are powered by specified areas at specified intervals.
and may reduce payload. Using an
the APU. But eTaxi brings savings of up These intervals are the minimum
MSN or ‘tail-centric’ approach,
to 85% compared to two-engine taxi allowable, but the industry is
NAVBLUE offers a set of innovative
and removes pushback fees: the weight constantly seeking to extend task
applications to save fuel. Its consulting
of the electric motors is compensated intervals. Although carrying out any
services help airlines implement a fuel
by fuel savings. It will be available on maintenance task more regularly might
and flight efficiency strategy by
the A320 Family from 2021. increase maintenance costs, some
optimizing activities related to flight
tasks can bring significant reductions
preparation and flight operations.
in fuel consumption.
TaxiBot eTaxi
Focus on fuel
8102
-
26#TSAF
90
Sustainable aviation fuels
Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF) are a significant pillar to be used by aviation to
reach carbon neutral growth. SAF are built by blending alternative and renewable
sources of raw materials with conventional fuels. A variety of blends is available
on the open market, although the sector is still in its infancy in terms of large-scale
use. Compared to conventional jet fuel, SAF can reduce life cycle greenhouse gas
emissions by up to 80%.
2010 2020 2050
1.5% fuel efficiency Carbon neutral -50% CO2 emissions
per year growth compared to 2005
Airbus supports the CORSIA Airbus supports
ATAG* aspirational Airbus supports ATAG, ATAG in this ambitious
objective to achieve ICAO, states and airlines and challenging goal
1.5% fuel efficiency to ensure the successful towards a 2-degree
per year with new implementation of pathway requiring
technologies and the CORSIA scheme significant research,
new aircraft - also contributing investment and policy
Improve fleet
*Air Transport Action Group to capacity building development fuel efficient by
1.5% per year
from now until
2020.
Around 100,000 flights per year are now operated using SAF, according to IATA
data. However that amounts to just 0.5% of the aviation industry’s total fuel bill
of around $200 billion a year. IATA says a ‘massive uplift’ in SAF production and
use is necessary to reach a 50% cut in net CO2 emissions by 2050, compared
to 2005 levels.
Airbus offers customer ferry flights from its Toulouse base using a biofuel blend
provided by Total. Cathay Pacific uses the facility for each A350 XWB delivery,
including its first A350-1000 which left Toulouse in June carrying a 10% blend
of sugarcane-based biofuel. Other customers, including China Airlines and Iberia,
have also used the facility for their ferry flights. Airbus’ delivery centres in Mobile
(Alabama) and Finkenwerder (Germany) have been identified as the next targets
for SAF facilities.
CONCLUSION
Effective fuel management is essential to optimising airline operations and reducing aviation’s environmental
footprint. This is especially true at times of fuel price volatility. While latest-generation engines such as those
that power the A320neo, A330neo and A350 XWB offer significant savings, it is important to see the bigger
picture. Fuel burn can be truly optimised by implementing performance-boosting retrofits and running efficient
ground, flight and maintenance operations.
Fuel efficiency recommendations are subject to continuous improvement and Airbus works closely with its
customers to optimise fuel consumption. Airbus is of course fully committed to carbon-neutral aviation
through its support for monitoring initiatives such as CORSIA and institutional programmes such as the United
Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals.
5002 0102 0202 0302 0402 0502
No action
Challenges and targets
Known technology, operations
and infrastructure measures
Biofuels and additional
new-generation technologies
Economic measures
Sustainable aviation fuels
Net emissions trajectory
‘No actions’ trajectory and new technologies
Carbon neutral growth are expected to account
Cap net for more than 50%
emissions
from 2020 of CO savings
through carbon 2
By 2050
neutral growth
aviation carbon -50%
emissions will be
half what they CO2 emissions
were in 2005 indexed to 2005
Lightning
and HIRF
effects
Monitoring aircraft to ensure long-term protection
Article by
Eduardo ORGAZ VILLEGAS
Maintenance Engineering - Systems
AIRBUS
eduardo.orgaz@airbus.com
When lightning strikes an aircraft, the result
looks spectacular from the ground and it
can also cause alarm for passengers.
However, aircraft are designed to cope well
with what is actually a fairly common event
– on average a passenger jet will be hit by
lightning once every 1,000 flight hours.
Airbus monitors one of the different means
of protection against lightning which also
contributes to protecting aircraft against
High Intensity Radiated Fields (HIRF). 8102
-
26#TSAF
01
Lightning and HIRF effects
What happens during
a lightning strike?
Lightning strikes are most likely to occur during landing and takeoff flight phases
when aircraft are passing through cumulonimbus clouds that create high electrical
charges. Strikes are less likely during cruise phase, partly because most cruising
altitudes are well above the clouds, but also because pilots can navigate around
storms once they are well into their journey.
Lightning arrives at the extremities or protuberances of the aircraft, usually a wing
tip or the nose; this is known as the entry point. It then leaves from another
extremity, or exit point, such as the tail, as it continues on its path to earth.
During this process the fuselage acts as a Faraday cage: an enclosure used to
block electromagnetic fields and conduct the lightning current safely.
Those onboard might notice some noise, sense what feels like an impact and even
experience brief disruption of the cabin lights; however there is usually no cause
for concern. On traditionally designed aircraft the aluminium ‘skin’ does the
conducting, while ultra-modern aircraft such as the A350 XWB have a copper layer
embedded in their carbon fibre fuselage sections specifically to handle lightning.
The aircraft is designed to ensure aircraft structure electrical continuity. It is
capable of distributing lightning current in a highly effective way, thus providing
key protection. Nevertheless, there are other means of protection such as: systems
architecture (ensuring redundancy and dissimilarity); devices/equipment protection
(equipment qualification against electromagnetic hazards); and design and
installation rules of the electrical installation.
Dealing with induced current
When an aircraft is struck by lightning, induced voltages inside the fuselage may
occur. These induced voltages are produced between the external surface of the
aircraft, where the current is high, and the internal part of the aircraft which acts
as ground to the potential reference.
The induced voltages could be enough to disrupt the aircraft systems if harnesses
lacked an additional layer of protection. This protection is provided through the use
of braided metal conduits which conduct current safely to the aircraft’s voltage
reference points, ensuring only a minor amount of current reaches the cables
inside or metallic raceways protecting cable signals.
The conduits also function as a barrier reducing HIRFs* such as those generated
by radar stations. These could interfere with the functioning of aircraft systems but
the braided conduits, combined with Electro-Magnetic Hazards (EMH) qualification
equipment, ensure attenuation of HIRF events. All aircraft equipment is qualified
against EMH, based on Environmental EUROCAE RTCA-DO160 (environmental
conditions and test procedures for airborne equipment).
*HIRF = High Intensity Radiated Fields
8102
-
26#TSAF
11
Braided metal conduits
8102
-
26#TSAF
21
Lightning and HIRF effects
Checking for damage:
Lightning/HIRF Assurance Plan
Of course, all this protection relies on the good condition of the conduits and their
correct functioning throughout the aircraft’s lifecycle. As well as satisfying
airworthiness requirements of the conduits at the time of type certification, Airbus
monitors them over time through a sampling campaign. This is known as the
Lightning/HIRF Assurance Plan and through Airbus expertise, close collaboration
with customers and systematic data gathering, it contributes to keeping the current
fleet safe as well as to improving future aircraft design.
How aircraft are selected
For each campaign, Airbus works on a representative sample of aircraft
considering a range of environmental factors such as humidity, heat levels, routes,
airports and distances covered. Having identified suitable aircraft for sampling,
Airbus invites the corresponding operators to participate in the campaign with one
aircraft from each fleet. Lightning/HIRF inspections are then organised to fit around
the airline’s routine maintenance checks so that there is no disruption to normal
MRO scheduled activities.
Sampling campaigns start six years after entry-into-service, with one aircraft per
family inspected per year. This sampling is repeated after 12 years (2nd campaign),
18 years (3rd campaign) and so on.
The inspection: finding and fixing issues
Airlines are already obliged to carry out their own visual inspections. However,
Airbus looks for signs which are not visible from the outside. These inspections
can take place anywhere in the world and usually involve a small, multi-
functional team of experts from Airbus with the full range of engineering and
maintenance skills that could be required.
Potential sources of High Intensity Radiated Fields
Military aircraft
Commercial aircraft
Telecommunications
Sea vessels
Radar Vehicles
Lightning and HIRF effects
Most of the work involves a device known as a loop resistance tester (LRT).
With all aircraft systems switched off, this is clamped onto a section of the
braided conduit and a measured current is applied. The team measures the
flow of charge through the conduits. The LRT shows how well the conduit is
conducting the current, thus demonstrating the status of the harness protection.
If any sign of conductivity reduction is revealed, the LRT pinpoints the cause.
The team has a part 145 qualification allowing it to work on the aircraft and
repair or rectify as required, free of charge.
Loop Resistance Tester Multimeter
AC current AC current
applied measured
AIRCRAFT STRUCTURE
This process is repeated on conduits all over the aircraft over a period of several
days and all data about different forms of degradation is recorded. Causes of
conductivity reduction have included mainly degradation of bonding areas linked
to environmental conditions. The team can deal with many issues directly
on-site. It tends to find fewer issues on older aircraft as modifications and
service bulletins, made following earlier sampling campaigns, have guided
constant refinements of the design.
After inspection: bringing long-term solutions
Once Airbus has inspected all targeted aircraft in a sampling campaign, it
presents the findings to the aircraft certification authorities (EASA and FAA).
After careful consideration, solutions are agreed for any issues that have been
found. They could involve quality improvements, modifications, or changes to
scheduled maintenance tasks. Finally, the outcomes may influence the scope
and number of aircraft to involve for the following campaign.
The data gathered during campaigns is also extremely valuable in informing the
design of aircraft and variants to remove common causes of degradation – an
example of highly effective preventative maintenance. The work carried out on
aircraft during inspections will influence current and next generations.
CONCLUSION
Although aircraft are very well protected against lightning strike and HIRFs, the use of braided metal conduits
to add an extra layer of protection to the aircraft’s systems is essential for airworthiness certification.
Through regular sampling campaigns, the Lightning/HIRF Assurance Plan helps to ensure that these standards
are maintained throughout the lifecycle. Findings from inspections are shared with the certification authorities
and the Airbus design office also uses them to refine their future use of conduits.
8102
-
26#TSAF
31
Laminar wings
Testing, with pilots in mind
8102
-
26#TSAF
41
Airbus is working at the heart of European research into
the feasibility of natural laminar flow within an industrial
environment. Known as BLADE (Breakthrough Laminar
Aircraft Demonstrator in Europe), the project involves
21 partners and around 500 contributors working closely
together as part of the Clean Sky* European project.
All of them depend on the data gathered by an Airbus
flight test team to push the research further.
8102
-
26#TSAF
51
Laminar winxgysz
*Clean Sky is a European research programme developing innovative, cutting-edge technology aimed
at reducing CO , gas emissions and noise levels produced by aircraft. Funded by the EU’s Horizon 2020
2
programme, Clean Sky is a joint undertaking that contributes to strengthening European aero-industry
collaboration, global leadership and competitiveness.
8102
-
26#TSAF
61
Laminar wings
FAST talked to (left to right)
Julien Moreau - flight test specialist engineer,
José Corugedo-Bermejo - flight test engineer,
Thierry Fol - flight lab leader,
Karl-Heinz Mai - experimental test pilot,
to find out more about their role in the project,
how they keep airlines in mind and exactly how
they gather the data.
FAST: What are you hoping to achieve with BLADE? Examples of two upper cover options
Karl-Heinz: The simplest way to put it is fuel efficiency. Natural laminarity is
essentially super smooth air flow close to the wing skin and the resulting reduction
Natural Laminar Flow wing section
in drag allows aircraft to fly using less power. In concrete terms, the use of laminar
wings on short and medium range commercial aircraft could mean a 5% fuel burn
saving, by modifying the shape and the surface finish. This would create many
financial benefits, as well as a consequent drop in emissions. However, it has to be
achieved without adding complexity in aircraft operation for pilots and airlines, and Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wing structure
without having too much impact on cruising speed. Laminar wing w s ith tr c u o c n t t u in r u e ou c s o s n ur c fa e c p e t with leading edge jo L in a e m d i t n o a bo r x wing structure
Thierry: We already know that laminarity works – gliders are usually laminar aircraft with continuous surface with leading edge joined to box
- but it has long been assumed that it is unsuitable for larger, more robust
commercial aircraft with their need for much greater speeds and power. The
argument has been that, although a laminar commercial aircraft is technically
possible, it couldn’t be produced at a cost that made it practical.
Karl-Heinz: That practicality is a recurring theme in the project. Laminarity’s full
benefits are probably best achieved at slightly lower speeds than airlines currently
favour, so we have to consider the possible consequences for air traffic control.
Flight controls and flight parameters have to be adapted to ensure that aircraft
handling remains normal. The flight envelope might change a little and the physics
might shift slightly but, for pilots converting to a laminar winged aircraft, there has
to be no change.
Starboard Port
Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wing structure
with continuous surface with leading edge joined to box
“5% fuel burn saving without adding Starboard Port
Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wing structure
complexity in aircraft operation for with continuous surface with leading edge joined to box
pilots and airlines, and without having
too much impact on cruising speed”
8102
-
26#TSAF
71
Laminar wings
FAST: So are you flying with root-to-tip laminar wings now?
Julien: No, but that’s quite a common misconception so it’s best to be clear about
what we do. We needed a scale-1 demonstrator to test the laminar surfaces that
some of the BLADE partner companies have developed. This was firstly because
we want to fly these laminar surfaces in representative aerodynamic conditions,
in terms of Mach* and Reynolds* numbers.
And secondly, wings flex and distort in flight and that can disrupt laminar flow.
We aren’t flying around with a futuristic A340 wing. The experimental zone refers
only to the panels of laminar materials in place of some of the outer wing panels of
an A340 test aircraft. We’re then monitoring what happens to those panels during
Examples of two upper cover options real flights and sharing that data with the rest of the project.
José: You’d never see an aircraft in flight with different coloured panels; but we’re
not after cosmetic perfection, we just need results. Being able to use the first A340
Natural Laminar Flow wing section ever built was fantastic because its big wings give us a natural zone to experiment:
the 2/3 span of a typical transonic short-range aircraft wing of the type most likely
to benefit from natural laminarity.
Thierry: That’s one of the great benefits of being involved in this project – it’s a
Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wing structure genuinely experimental test flight campaign. If we need to check results or fly
with continuous surface with leading edge joined to box
Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wing structure differently, we can. The partners tell us what they’d like to know, but we decide
with continuous surface with leading edge joined to box how to gather the data. This can be challenging but it’s also fun being pushed to
find solutions. Knowing about the transition from laminar to turbulent flow on a
surface in a lab is essential. Knowing how much the distortion caused by the
aircraft movement can trigger the transition is a whole new area.
FAST: How do you gather the data?
Julien: A full list of techniques would be very long but I think the most unusual
compared to standard flight test equipment probably involve infrared cameras,
reflectometry, the waviness beam and pressure taps. Getting the first infrared
images showing exactly where the transition line from laminar to turbulent air flow
was on the test panel was a thrill for us all. Infrared isn’t new technology but it was
the first time anybody had mounted cameras on an aircraft tail and used it to
measure laminarity on such a wide wing surface.
Starboard Port
Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wing structure
FAST: How well is BLADE going and can customers buy
with continuous surface with leading edge joined to box
aircraft with laminar wings in the near future?
José: We can’t answer the second part – we’re working to establish how well the
laminar panels supplied by our industrial partners will work in real flight conditions.
We can say that, from a flight test point of view, they seem to be working well
enough so far for us to be optimistic about the future.
Karl-Heinz: The other aspect is to emphasise what Julien said earlier – BLADE
Starboard Port
isn’t about trialing a new type of wing. We’re trying to establish whether laminarity
Laminar wing structure concept Laminar wcianng bster uac tpurraectical option for designers of future aircraft. At this stage we can’t be
with continuous surface with leading ecdegreta jioni ntheadt ttoh eb opxotential fuel savings can become a reality while avoiding
disruption and excessive expense, and we’re in no position to guess at
manufacturing costs. However, at Airbus we’re commercial aircraft-minded people
and we wouldn’t be pressing ahead with a project like BLADE if we didn’t think the
signs were suggesting that this could be good for us and our customers.
* Mach: Ratio between speed of aircraft and sound of aircraft
** Reynolds: Ratio between inertia forces and viscous forces inside the fluid
8102
-
26#TSAF
81
Laminar wings
Re-thinking testing methods
A great deal of the data gathered during the BLADE flights is gathered on all test flights
and standard flight test installation equipment fulfils this function. However, the data
relating to laminar flow required new equipment and new thinking.
Infra-red
To provide data that will help partners decide if a laminar wing will be a practical
option for future serial production aircraft, the team needed to record changes in
laminarity levels on the test panels in real time. The changes to the wing surface
caused by adjustments in angle of attack or speed influence the air flow over the
wing. To measure these changes, they used existing infra-red technology and
skin temperature change at transition point.
As shown in the diagram below, laminarity involves a thin layer of smooth air
flowing over the wing skin. When this flow ceases to be smooth and becomes
turbulent, it has reached the line of transition and laminar flow has ended. The
exact point at which this happens changes according to the materials and shape
used to make the test panel and all the other variables that occur during flight.
The BLADE test team mounted infra-red cameras on the vertical tailplane of the
A340 and these provide a stream of images showing the thermal patterns on the
wing as shown in image to the right.
The areas where air flow is turbulent appear white and light grey in the infra-red
images and the areas of laminar flow show as dark grey. Looking at these
images alongside flight data allows an accurate account to be established of
how the laminarity of the panels being tested changed in the course of any
flight. This is crucial information for the wider BLADE project but whenever a
change is detected a question is raised: Why did that change in laminarity
occur?
Infra-red airflow
Laminar flow
Turbulent air flow disperses wing heat by increasing mixing with
cooler air around wing. Then wing temperature distribution is directly
linked with transition line.
Laminar
8102
-
26#TSAF
91
Laminar wings
Reflectrometry
The answer is frequently to do with changes in the wing surface caused by
pressure changes during flight. To measure these pressure changes, and the
distortion they cause, the BLADE team combines a brand new technique with
some well-established, pressure-measuring ones.
The new technique is known as reflectrometry and relies on the basic concept
that, to get a perfect reflection, a completely flawless reflective surface is needed.
The further that surface moves away from perfection, the more distorted the
reflected image becomes, as demonstrated by mirrors at fairgrounds.
This is the first time that reflectometry has been used during flight tests so, although
the BLADE team are pleased with its performance, they are cautious and run a
simultaneous test using other means to ensure that the results are accurate.
8102
-
26#TSAF
02
Laminar wings
8102
-
26#TSAF
12
Laminar wings
The waviness beam
Rather than trying to replicate the ‘whole wing’ approach of reflectometry, the
team take a clear, highly accurate linear measurement of any skin waviness
caused by pressure changes. A beam supporting a line of highly sensitive, tiny
position sensors is placed under the skin of the wing and this generates a mass
of data showing exactly what is happening to the wing skin across a single narrow
section of the wing. If this data confirms the wider picture being given by the
reflectometry equipment, the team can be confident that they have an accurate
way of recording the effects.
Flight deformation data
In-flight deformation data is a crucial support in tackling industrial constraints
because it allows researchers working on different laminar materials to predict the
impact that different manufacturing techniques will have on the laminar flow levels
of a future wing. If creating the most laminar wing possible makes it too expensive
to manufacture, a wing that offers a certain amount of laminarity could be
economically viable. To decide this, the designers of tomorrow’s wings need to
understand the distortion levels and performance of the different laminar options.
CONCLUSION
The Airbus flight test team are playing a key role in the BLADE partnership. By taking a flexible and genuinely
experimental approach to how they use the A340 test aircraft, the team is generating data that will allow
Airbus and its partners to come to a careful assessment of the commercial potential of laminar wings.
That assessment’s accuracy will depend on having data that demonstrates how the experimental wing
surface behaves during real flight. Testing panels which are integrated into a bigger and well-established
wing is a long way from flying any fully laminar wing that might be designed in future. However, gaining
real-world insights into laminar flow could now allow that design process and the consequent fuel burn
and emission savings to become reality sooner than was previously thought likely. BLADE is accelerating
industrial laminarity.
Be cool,
be efficient
Better management of air-con on the ground
8102
-
26#TSAF
22
Article by Didier GENDRE
Airport Operations Manager
AIRBUS
didier.gendre@airbus.com
Nicolas ORVAIN
Electromechanical Systems Manager
- Engineering Sales & Marketing
AIRBUS
nicolas.orvain@airbus.com
Dariusz KRAKOWSKI
ECS System Architect ATA21/36
AIRBUS
dariusz.krakowski@airbus.com
Making passengers feel comfortable, even as Although on-board auxiliary power units (APUs)
can provide effective cabin air-conditioning, they
they are boarding their plane, gives a good first
are increasingly restricted by legislation and may
impression. In hot climates, this means the cabin not be the preferred option for environmentally
friendly and cost-conscious airlines.
temperature is cool and the step from boarding
Whether a solution involves conventional ground
gate to cabin is seamless. The challenge for
carts or subfreezing operations*, best practices
airlines is to keep their passengers comfortable can improve air-conditioning operations on the
ground. There are ‘quick wins’ and more complex
whilst at the same time reducing fuel consumption
procedures, but it is worthwhile carefully
in line with airport environmental requirements; considering how to combine them to best effect
to obtain maximum efficiency at minimum cost.
they also need to keep their own costs down.
*Subfreezing operations: the temperature at the aircraft inlet is below 2°C
8102
-
26#TSAF
32
Be cool, be efficient
Quick wins on the apron
Efficient air-conditioning operations are in everybody’s best interests and Airbus
provides data and guidance. However, if air-conditioning on the ground seems
too costly or is not meeting the expected standards, checking some basic
measures may help.
Choosing the right cart
Airbus does not recommend one particular cart because every airline operates
in its own way, flying different destinations and times. Add the variations in cabin
layouts and passenger numbers and there simply isn’t a ‘right air cooling unit’ for
everybody. However, there are some aspects of the aircraft characteristics that
are worth emphasising:
The air flow rates and temperature requirements for the ground cart, provided in
sections 5.6 and 5.7 of the aircraft characteristics documents, are needed at the
point where the aircraft is connected to the ground equipment.
The manufacturers of the equipment publish a cooling capacity in kilo-watts or
tons in the US. However, this is only indicative and will not necessarily ensure the
temperature and flow rate combinations at the point of aircraft connection that
translate into good performance.
Steady state data – a false friend?
Airlines choosing a cart might also look at the steady state* data, but this actually
refers to a theoretical state of a settled temperature that is never reached in
normal operations. Once an aircraft is ready to take off, the job of the ground
equipment is over and the on-board systems run the air-conditioning. This usually
occurs long before the steady state is reached which means that, although the
figure is very useful for ground air-conditioning designers, it is of limited use to
airlines.
The example below shows a cart which might be rejected because it has a steady
state above the desired comfort zone. Nevertheless, it might actually do an
efficient job of pulling down the cabin temperature to below the 27°C objective
in plenty of time for boarding. Equipment with a steady state figure within the
comfort zone might be more powerful and expensive than is really needed.
Boarding Dispatch erutarepmet
nibaC
*Steady state is reached when the temperature distribution of the cabin does not change with respect to time.
Air-conditioning at turnaround
38°C
Steady state
27°C
COMFORT ZONE
t=0
time
Pull-down time
Pull-down time: the time needed
to lower cabin temperature down
Pull-down time
to its temperature objective,
prior to passenger boarding
8102
-
26#TSAF
42
Be cool, be efficient
Common mistakes – and best practices
When it comes to using the cart, there is still more to do than simply switching it
on or off, even when the unit performances appear to match with aircraft demand.
Three of the photographs below show a number of common mistakes that can
combine to make a cart 50% less effective in cooling performance than it should
be. Severe bends, or ‘elbows’, in hoses cause a loss of pressure which leads to a
drop in cooling power. The same is true of undetected leakages, while overly-long
hoses dragging on the ground can lead to the cooled air becoming warmer than
it should be by the time it reaches the aircraft.
The other two photos show some popular best practices. One is the use of
stainless steel telescopic tubes which is a low maintenance, highly effective
alternative to traditional hoses. The other shows a pit system that protects hoses
and pre-conditioned air units from heat and contamination by keeping them
underground. This is being installed in the Middle East at Bahrain and Dubai,
and in Europe at Barcelona and Hamburg.
Examples of mishandling / misuse Examples of good operation
1) Elbows on hoses when deployed 4) Stainless steel telescopic (IST solution)
beneath the PBB
2) Leaks/bad condition (wearing) of the hose
5) PCA pits (Cavotec solution in Bahrain),
3) Too much hose on ground
shortening hose length and reducing contamination
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
8102
-
26#TSAF
52
Be cool, be efficient
Quick wins in the aircraft
Airlines continue to request solutions for an APU alternative at the gate. In addition
to subfreezing, other initiatives have been launched to explore solutions.
Cabin fans on or off?
The AMM tasks related to air-conditioning used to require cabin fans to be ON;
this was a default position. It was associated with a CAUTION, the rationale being
the possibility of damage to avionics. Nevertheless, some airlines did practice
‘FANS OFF’ on their aircraft as they experienced better air-conditioning for the
cabin. After analysis of the impact on avionics, Airbus’ recommendation for
‘FANS ON’ eventually turned out to have been conservative, except for the
A330/A340 Family for which the recommendation ‘FANS ON’ is maintained.
‘Cabin FANS OFF’ operation is now permitted on all Airbus products except
the A330/A340 Family, when supplying air at the aircraft inlet above +2°C.
This allows an increase in the maximum flow rate entering the aircraft.
For example, for the A320 Family, the maximum flow rate goes from 1.0 kg/s –
limitation with ‘Cabin FANS ON’, up to 1.3 kg/s – limitation with ‘Cabin FANS OFF’.
This increased flow rate can help to achieve faster cooling and is an improvement
even if not combined with the best practices described here.
A/C type AMM simplified Cautions *See detailed description in the AMM AMM reference
A320 > CAB FANS ON/OFF 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 12-33-21-618-001-A
> PCA ON Pre-conditioning through the LP Ground Connection
A320 > Subfreezing PCA 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 12-33-21-618-002-A
> CAB FANS ON FANS ON mandatory Pre-conditioning through the Low Pressure SUBFREEZING PCA GROUND-AIR SUPPLY
A380 > Subfreezing PCA 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 21-00-00-618-805-A
> CAB FANS ON FANS ON mandatory Pre-Conditioning through the Low-Pressure SUBFREEZING PCA GROUND-AIR SUPPLY
> APU ON
A380 > PCA ON 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 21-00-00-618-808-A
CAX to be checked Pre-conditioning through the Low-Pressure Ground Connection together with the APU
> CAB FANS OFF
> APU OFF
1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 21-00-00-618-801-A
A380 > PCA ON
CAX to be checked for CAB Fans OFF Pre-Conditioning through the Low-Pressure Ground Connection with Electrical Power On
> CAB FANS OFF/ON
A350 > Subfreezing PCA 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK A350-A-21-XX-XX-03001-398A-A
> CAB FANS ON Fans ON mandatory Pre-Conditioning with Subfreezing Air through the Low Pressure (LP) Ground Connection
> APU OFF
TASK A350-A-21-XX-XX-00001-398A-A
A350 > PCA ON 1 door opened or alternative free area*
Pre-Conditioning through the Low Pressure (LP) Ground Connection
> CAB FANS OFF/ON
> Subfreezing PCA/LPG 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 12-33-21-618-801-A03
A330
> CAB FANS ON FANS ON mandatory Pre-conditioning with a Low-Pressure SUBFREEZING PCA ground-air supply unit
> APU OFF
1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 12-33-21-618-801-A
A330 > CAB FANS ON
FANS ON mandatory for Avionic Ventilation Pre-conditioning through the Low-Pressure Ground Connection
> PCA ON
> Subfreezing PCA 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 12-33-21-618-801-A03
A340
> CAB FANS ON FANS ON mandatory Pre-conditioning with a Low-Pressure SUBFREEZING PCA ground-air supply unit
> APU OFF 1 door opened or alternative free area* TASK 12-33-21-618-801-A
A340 > CAB FANS ON FANS ON mandatory for Avionic Ventilation Pre-conditioning through the Low-Pressure Ground Connection
> PCA ON
8102
-
26#TSAF
62
Be cool, be efficient
Why Does FANS ON/OFF vary according to avionics architecture?
For the A330 and A340 programmes, CAB FANS are integrated into the avionic
ventilation system as blowing fans and supply some of the necessary air to the
avionic compartments. Switching them off directly impacts the avionic ventilation
system which is why Airbus does not recommend switching CAB FANS OFF for
A330 and A340.
For the A380, to decide if CAB FANS can be switched to OFF, operators should
refer to the dedicated AMM task. Part of the ventilation system (the low pressure
fans system) supplies some air required by the rear avionic compartments so, if
CAB FANS are switched to OFF, there is a need to check the extraction operates
properly.
Also, all Airbus aircraft should have FANS ON during subfreezing operations:
this is to prevent risk of icing in the mixing chamber.
Deployment of subfreezing units
Airbus already issued a list of design requirements for the subfreezing unit suppliers.
These requirements are provided in the document ‘Subfreezing PCA carts: compliance
document for suppliers’ (ref: X21RP1146224, issue 06, dated 02 February 2015).
As explained in the article on subfreezing in FAST #52:
Replacing the need for APU use at the gate, ground units may now provide -25°C Pre-
Conditioned Air (PCA) directly to the aircraft’s interface, without any aircraft modification.
This new subfreezing PCA considerably reduces the ‘pull-down’ phase, even in extremely
hot and humid conditions, and allows airlines to keep the aircraft cool more efficiently
during turnaround time. The reduced use of the Auxiliary Power Unit leads to economy
of fuel and reduction of direct maintenance costs. Furthermore the ‘pack off’ operation
increases the time between cleaning the pack heat exchangers and contributes
to reducing bleed leak overheat occurrences in hot regions.
A resulting advantage is the decrease of noise pollution and emissions at the gate.
Five risks, resulting in limitations for ground air conditioning operations, have
been identified:
Risk Limitation Low pressure
air-con operations
Cabin overpressure Max. flow rate at A/C inlet in kg/sec All
Duct overpressure Max. pressure at A/C inlet in mbars-g All
Icing in the mixing chamber Min. temperature at A/C inlet in °C Subfreezing
Duct over-temperature Max. temperature at A/C inlet in °C All
Icing in the mixer chamber Max. humidity at A/C inlet in g water/1 kg air Subfreezing
and distribution ducting
All these limits are defined based on current Airbus Environmental Control System
architecture and differ from one programme to another.
Subfreezing system
Compressor Driver PCA Decoding unit Data broadcaster
Provide compressed air Suppress humidity Control air flow - Connect to the broadcaster wifi network - Provide wifi access point
- Decode the received A/C parameters - Connected to P-MAT plug
- Provide representative analog signals - Select / down-sample A/C parameters
to PCA control unit - Broadcast live parameters
8102
-
26#TSAF
72
Be cool, be efficient
Manufacturers have developed three families of products:
• Air systems (cold production by expansion throughout an air cycle machine) Systems can be centralised
or ‘on post’ as mobile equipment
• Vapour cycle systems (evaporation/compression of cooling fluid)
or equipment fixed under
• Other solutions based on liquid nitrogen evaporation (air/nitrogen exchanger) the passenger bridge.
The three solutions above are compliant with Airbus defrost cycle with manufacturers requesting a reduction of
requirements, so the choice will be made according to airport the cycle period. In agreement with customers, each proposal
development plans and airline needs according to the air features a particular setting, ranging from soft subfreezing
cooling unit performances and the characteristics of the (down to -10°C at the aircraft inlet) to deep subfreezing
turnaround. Following discussions with the manufacturers, (down to -25°C at the aircraft inlet), according to the ambient
the compliance document (issue 06) has reached a certain conditions, from extreme hot areas to continental ambience.
maturity level, the main topic of discussion being on the
APU restrictions and fuel savings:
Today, roughly one third of airports restrict the use of the However, for air cooling units lacking in performance, the
APU, mainly to reduce noise and emissions. The Aeronautical APU still has to be operated during boarding or disembarking
Information Publication mentions that ‘the use of the fixed in hot regions.
energy system has saved 12,170 tonnes (t) of fuel, 38,500t of
Deployment of subfreezing solutions is actually slower than
carbon dioxide (CO ) and 75t of nitrogen oxides (NOx)’.
2 hoped previously and the introduction of this new operating
Extract from Unique (Flughafen Zürich AG), Zurich, 2004.
procedure for air-conditioning in AMM tasks is not yet
Another study was made by an air cooling unit manufacturer widespread. At new airports in extremely hot areas, it appears
in 2005 demonstrating the benefits of current air-conditioning to be a prerequisite, the trend being for these new hubs to
ground cart units. It concluded that airlines could save 15M have a centralised system delivering subfreezing air at each
USD per year and an airport could obtain a net revenue of gate.
2.5M USD with a return on investment in three years, just by
With these notable exceptions, there does seem to be a
using PCA.
reluctance to embrace the new technologies: this may be due
This shows that in terms of economy, it is preferable to use to lack of awareness, unfavourable economics, or both.
a ground-based PCA instead of the APU. Either way, use of the APU at the gate remains quite common.
Alternatives to subfreezing
Airbus has developed for the A380 only, a specific procedure A trend for the airport of the future is automation at the ramp
for extreme hot day operation on ground with APU ON, CAB with use of extensive ground units connected and one single
FANS OFF and air cooling unit operative. This new procedure man-machine interface. Smart GSE wireless connectivity for
allows operation of the APU at a lower regime with air cooling ground cooling function has been successfully tested on one
unit operative. A350 XWB test aircraft, allowing a closed loop in temperature
between the aircraft and the ground and making the air-
The new procedure exists under reference AMM TASK
conditioning operation a simple one
21-00-00-618-808-A, Pre-Conditioning through the Low-
(ON/OFF unit after selection of the aircraft)
Pressure Ground Connection together with the APU.
and both more efficient and safer
(flow rate and temperature control).
Air cooling unit – wireless connectivity
Be cool, be efficient
8102
-
26#TSAF
82
Achieving the comfort objective
The most effective approach to achieving the correct cabin temperature varies massively according to the airline,
the destination and the time of day. Taking careful account of all the variables to make a series of correct
decisions is essential. Subfreezing is one solution, especially in hot and humid environments such as the Gulf
nations, but it is not always available. New air-conditioning procedures are also an option and are further
alternatives to using the APU, although they are probably not sufficient in very hot and humid environments.
Referring to the air-conditioning charts in the AMM, airlines can pick the best solution that fits the comfort
temperature objective for one specific aircraft on a particular mission.
As an example, let’s consider an A320 aircraft. The aircraft is hot-soaked (45°C outside average temperature)
in Doha, Qatar, and has to be prepared to fly in the morning (pull-down) to Amman, Jordan.
First flight of the day
Preparation of the aircraft (pull-down phase):
APU OFF
OAT (Outside Average Temperature) 45°C
Aircraft is soaked up (cabin at 45°C)
T0: Start air-conditioning
Air-conditioning (COOLING) settings (conditions at aircraft inlet): 1.3 kg/s at 2°C
(not exceeding 40 mbar-g at the aircraft interface) FANS OFF operation
Objective: pull the cabin temperature down to 27°C (comfort objective) in less than
one hour. T0+49 minutes: aircraft cabin = 27°C; T0+65 minutes: aircraft cabin = 25°C
Turnaround at departure from Doha, Qatar with OAT 45°C:
IFE: ON
Blinds: OFF
Lights: ON
Galleys: ON
Air conditioning (COOLING) settings (conditions at aircraft inlet):1.0 kg/s at 2°C
(not exceeding 40 mbar-g at aircraft interface) FANS ON operation.
Objective: maintain cabin temperature at 25°C
T0: Start boarding
T0+45 min. dispatch (APU ON)
Two-hour flight - turnaround at destination (Amman)
OAT 30°C
Aircraft cabin at 25°C
Air-conditioning (COOLING) settings (conditions at aircraft inlet): 1.3 kg/s at 2°C
(not exceed 40 mbar-g at the aircraft interface) FANS ON operation.
Objective: maintain cabin temperature at 25°C
T0: Start de-boarding
T0+45 minutes: dispatch (APU ON)
Two-hour flight - turnaround at destination (Doha)
OAT 45°C
Aircraft cabin at 25°C
Same objective and settings as above
Be cool, be efficient
This target has to be met after pull-down of the hot-soaked aircraft and is to be maintained
during the turnaround of the aircraft (de-boarding/boarding of passengers until dispatch).
With a 45°C outside average temperature (OAT), for the A320 the following target temperatures
can be met (with max. 40 mbars-g pressure at Aircraft Interface):
Aircon ground Cabin Fans Flow rate Temp at Achieved cabin Pull-down
ops status at aircraft inlet A/C inlet temperature at the
duration
(kg/sec) end of pull-down
22°C 85 min
Subfreezing unit ON (mandatory) 1.0 -10°C 25°C 59 min
27°C 46 min
22°C >2 hrs
Conventional ON 1.0 +2°C 25°C >2 hrs
27°C 139 min
22°C 103 min
Conventional OFF 1.3 +2°C 25°C 65 min
27°C 49 min
CONCLUSION
Environmental legislation, coupled with the determination of airlines and airports to become
‘greener’, means that the drive to find alternatives to APUs on the ground is set to continue
and intensify. Alternatives certainly exist thanks to subfreezing technology and new procedures.
Depending on their cooling power and the ambient conditions, they can achieve cabin target
temperatures in many circumstances.
Nevertheless, a simple established truth that applies to all air-conditioning options remains pertinent.
All solutions rely on careful application of all the basic procedures and without this, they will be
rendered ineffective. Poor hose quality or a lack of care about deployment can undermine the
merits of any system.
A similar level of care is also essential in choosing the right options for a specific aircraft in
particular circumstances. This can make as much difference to energy consumption and effective
cooling as the selection of air-conditioning technology.
In the near future, the growing automation trend for ground operations will make air-conditioning
procedures even more efficient. We should see reductions in pull-down time for aircraft
preparation, improved safety with automatic shut-down in case of over pressure, excessive
flow rate or too low a temperature, and simpler control of units. This automation will rely on
e-connecting the air-conditioning unit to the aircraft, closing a temperature control loop between
the aircraft and the unit, and drawing the best performance out of the unit to reach and maintain
the cabin temperature comfort target.
As these changes take place, Airbus is ready to support airlines and airports that want to improve
their ground operations, whether they are implementing subfreezing technology, tailoring
procedures or introducing connectivity to air cooling units.
8102
-
26#TSAF
92
8102
-
26#TSAF
03
The structural
fuel leak
challenge
Detecting and preventing
Fuel leaks are a fact of life for aircraft operators Article by (left to right)
and when they are discovered during walk-around
Nicolas RIBIÈRE
inspections, they can prove particularly disruptive Structure Engineering Expert
AIRBUS
and costly. Airbus receives frequent requests from
nicolas.ribiere@airbus.com
customers seeking support in detecting and managing
Patrick SALVAN-GUILLOTIN
these incidents. In response, it offers guidance based on
Wing-Pylon-HTP-VTP Structure Engineer
decades of experience with its global fleet. The dual aim AIRBUS
patrick.salvan-guillotin@airbus.com
is always to help operators reduce the time any aircraft
Clement DUCASSE
spends on the ground and to prevent recurrences
Wing-Pylon-HTP-VTP Structure Engineer
by ensuring that repairs are carried out correctly. AIRBUS
clement.ducasse@airbus.com
8102
-
26#TSAF
13
The structural fuel leak challenge
The structural
Where and why do fuel leaks happen?
The most common areas for fuel leaks are the wing dry bay and the wing to
fuel leak centre wing box RIB 01, but other areas may include the wing front spar, wing
bottom skin and wing tank access panel. Leaks can be challenging because
they can occur in many different places, and for a variety of different reasons.
challenge Wing to centre wing box junction Incorrect sealant application Current sealant cracked due to bolt rotation
Detecting and preventing
Damage on sealant bead Cavity not sealed
Seal degradation
Wing spar junction
Detecting external and internal leak points
The simplest form of external leak point detection can be carried out with fuel
remaining in the tanks and a basic product. The likely area of the leak source is
cleaned and then covered with a dusting of talcum powder. The powder’s
absorbent qualities allow it to soak up any fuel and the point at which a dribble,
or drops, of fuel emerge becomes visible. This method may not help to identify
the internal leak point but it can prove to be an efficient first step that yields
quick results.
To determine the origin of the leak, the internal leak point must be identified.
One efficient method is to drain the section of the fuel system where the leak
is present and introduce a pressurised mixture of 90% air and 10% helium.
This creates a detectable flow of gas out of the leak which exposes the exact
location of the problem.
Alternatively, a thin coat of liquid soap can be applied to potential leak sites,
then pressurised air introduced from the external leak point. The air finds the fault
in the system and makes the soap bubble up as it leaves – a clear visible sign of
the leak’s location. Using dye can also make spotting the location relatively easy.
8102
-
26#TSAF
23
The structural fuel leak challenge
Making the repair
Temporary repairs can be carried out on external leak points and only require
enough defueling to enable work on the specific area. After thorough cleaning,
sealant can be applied and, as long as tests confirm that the leak is fixed, the
aircraft can return to normal service. Nevertheless, it should be kept in mind that
this solution is only temporary and the problem will return unless a definitive repair
is carried out.
A definitive repair involves defueling, draining and venting of the tanks. The internal
leak point is then detected using the methods outlined above. All old sealant in the
affected area should be removed using appropriate tools. The area is then
inspected for damage, and a torque check included if necessary. A bolt removal/
installation may also be required, especially in the case of bolt rotation or migration
evidence. Finally, after thorough cleaning, the new sealant can be applied.
In the case of a definitive repair, the aircraft should return to service with a very low
probability of leak recurrence, although it will depend on the quality of the repair.
Inappropriate tools, sub-standard materials or incorrect methods will affect the
durability of the repair.
Taking action to prevent recurring leaks
One key to preventing fuel leaks is to check that repairs are carried out properly.
If any part of the process is flawed, then recurrence is very likely and inspections
do often reveal simple causes such as incorrect sealant application and damage to
sealant caused by bolt rotation.
In the case of fuel leaks around the fuel tank access panels, tell-tale streaking
around the panel is a clear sign that the seal is degraded and a leak will follow
within a few months. Replacing the seal at the next MRO opportunity, as described
in a dedicated article in FAST 52, will avoid an aircraft on ground situation following
a walk-around inspection.
Preventive action also means general
fuel leak mapping of the aircraft before
it enters the hangar.
Helium testing - image courtesy of Sunaero, equipment supplier.
8102
-
26#TSAF
33
The structural fuel leak challenge
Sharing know-how and experience
Detailed knowledge of the aircraft’s design is essential for effective fuel leak
trouble-shooting so Airbus has a dedicated team available to help customers.
They use their design knowledge and experience gathered across the global fleet
to evaluate fuel leak paths as quickly and accurately as possible.
Fuel leak path troubleshooting is done based on the analysis of the different
assembly steps at the Airbus FAL.
In the case of complex fuel leaks, Airbus strongly encourages customers to
complete the STRUCTURAL FUEL LEAK REPORTING FORM (SFLRF) mentioned
in the AMM 28-11-00. This form is required for Airbus analysis and support but
also for reporting fuel leak data for Airbus records only.
Meanwhile, customer requests for help with developing their own capacity to
deal with fuel leaks effectively have led to the launch of a new, tailored workshop
at the customer premises. After detailed discussions with the customer about its
fleet and experience of fuel leaks, the Airbus workshop leader prepares the
workshop to focus on the most relevant areas of trouble-shooting. For instance,
an airline might find it can deal with most leaks on most types of aircraft very
effectively, but that recurrence is a problem in a specific area. Or they might
repeatedly experience a specific type of leak right across their fleet. In either
case, the benefits of solving or minimizing the impact of a recurrent issue can
be substantial.
Whatever the focus, the workshop team combines classroom-based sessions
with time spent on an actual aircraft, guiding the mechanics through the
processes and techniques that will help to further refine their skills.
CONCLUSION
Dealing with fuel leaks effectively is a challenge because there are many potential sources.
Understanding the design of the aircraft and having a good grounding in detection techniques
is essential, as is the experience needed to carry out repairs to a high standard.
Airbus supports customers with fuel leak trouble-shooting and is now also offering workshops
for individual airlines.
Ultra Long Range
A350 XWB
Extra distance, extra comfort
The first Airbus A350-900 Ultra Long Range (ULR)
enters into service in October 2018 with Singapore Airlines
(SIA). SIA will use the aircraft to resume the world’s longest
commercial flight, from Singapore to New York.
How does the A350-900ULR differ from the standard A350-900,
and what makes it an efficient and competitive option?
The case for ultra-long-range flights
Today, airlines are flying further non-stop with the new generation A350 XWB,
with only the very longest routes requiring technical stops. Yet there is
increasing demand for non-stop, ultra-long-haul missions. The convenience
of them is especially attractive to business passengers, but they appeal as
much to anyone looking for a direct flight over very long distances.
Customers keen to open ultra-long-haul routes have long lacked the right
aircraft to perform them.
Through consultation with interested airlines, Airbus established the basic
technical characteristics that such an aircraft would require: a range of up
to 9,700 nautical miles, representing a flight duration of around 20 hours,
and without ETOPS* constraints. High comfort standards for both passengers
and crew, the latest entertainment system and a quiet cabin environment
were natural pre-requisites.
*ETOPS (Extended Twin Operations): acronym created by Article by (top to bottom)
ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organisation) to describe
the operation of twin-engined aircraft over a route that
contains a point further than one hour’s flying time from an Philippe PALMER
adequate airport at the approved one-engine inoperative A350 XWB PIP / ULR project leader
cruise speed.
AIRBUS
philippe.palmer@airbus.com
Ion LAZARE
Airframe Architect
AIRBUS
ion.lazare@airbus.com
8102
-
26#TSAF
43
Ultra Long Range
A350 XWB
Extra distance, extra comfort
8102
-
26#TSAF
53
Ultra Long Range A350 XWB
Technical differences between
A350-900ULR and standard A350-900
From 2018 onwards, the A350-900 comes with an improved baseline which further
improves the competitiveness of the product. It consists of an aerodynamic
performance improvement package including extended winglets, enhanced flap
support fairings, wing re-twist and modified over-wing fairings; and an increased
Maximum Take Off Weight (MTOW) option of 280 tonnes. All improvements
contribute to a greater payload/range capability.
The challenge was to offer these improvements while avoiding any weight impact
on the aircraft, and to deliver a mature design. Both have been made possible by
revising the loads model with knowledge acquired during flight testing, design
allowable improvement and some weight-saving modifications based on deploying
technology from the A350-1000. Finally, extensive flight tests in 2017 using Airbus
test aircraft secured a mature design for the A350-900ULR’s entry into service.
The major differences between the A350-900ULR and the standard version are:
Increased fuel capacity Reduced Weight
The A350-900ULR offers a fuel- The A350-900ULR is one tonne lighter
carrying capacity of up to 165,000 litres than the standard airframe, thanks to
(+ 24,000 litres compared to the three adaptations:
standard A350-900).
• The A350-900’s large aft cargo area
Adding this capacity requires means the forward cargo hold can
adaptation of the fuel system, including be deactivated for ULR operations.
the centre tank venting architecture
• Removal of one of the two tanks
and fuel quantity management system.
for potable and waste water.
Thanks to the A350-900’s scalable
platform, the capacity is provided • Single lane slide at door two
with existing tanks. (instead of dual lane slide).
From an industrial standpoint, manufacturing an A350-900ULR does not disrupt
production lead time when compared to a standard -900.
CONCLUSION
The entry into service of the A350-900ULR opens a new way of travelling. It responds to growing demand
for point-to-point ultra-long haul travel and creates a sustainable, efficient business model for airlines that
offer that product.
Thanks to the versatility and efficiency of the A350 XWB Family, Singapore Airlines is resuming the world’s
longest commercial route, from Singapore to New York, operated until 2013 by the A340-500.
Airbus is convinced there will be a growing demand for a category of travellers who want to travel as far as
possible in a non-stop flight. The answer is the Ultra Long Range A350 XWB.
8102
-
26#TSAF
63
Ultra Long Range A350 XWB
The A350 XWB Family
The A350-900ULR is the latest addition to Airbus’ ultra-modern A350 XWB
widebody Family. The Family comprises the baseline A350-900 and its larger
sister aircraft the A350-1000.
Based on a clean-sheet design, the A350 XWB is by essence a very flexible
platform. It is designed to offer full operational flexibility with unrivalled levels of
efficiency and comfort however it is operated, be it on domestic, regional, long
haul or ultra-long-haul services.
A350 XWB Family aircraft contain 53% carbon composites, supporting easier
maintenance and increased resistance to corrosion. They offer 25% lower operating
costs, fuel burn and CO emissions when compared to previous-generation aircraft.
2
The A350-900 is the cornerstone member of the A350 XWB Family.
It accommodates 325 passengers in a standard three-class configuration.
Measuring nearly 74 metres from nose-to-tail, the A350-1000 is the longest-fuselage
version of the A350 XWB Family. In a typical three-class configuration, the A350-1000
seats a total of 366 passengers. The aircraft entered into service in February 2018.
Why the A350-900 suits ultra-long-haul operations
Comfort Flexibility Economics
The A350-900’s Airspace cabin (see The A350 XWB Family is designed to The A350-900 is a clean sheet
right) offers the quietest widebody cabin provide airlines with high flexibility in design bringing a step change in
flying today. Its effective temperature operations. It can be operated efficiency, with 25% lower fuel burn
management system, lower cabin efficiently whatever the sector length, and cash operating costs compared
altitude compared to previous-generation from regional up to ultra-long-range. to the competitor aircraft it replaces.
aircraft, and full-LED ambient lighting all Additionally, with its mature design
This flexibility means the A350-
contribute to passengers’ well-being. the A350-900 reaches high levels
900ULR can easily be returned to
This helps them to arrive at their destina- of operational reliability.
a standard -900 configuration.
tions feeling rested and refreshed even
after the longest flights. Furthermore, Building the ULR from the A350-900
cabin air is renewed every two to three was made possible thanks to
minutes, a shorter cycle than the older extensive design and upstream
aircraft it replaces. industrial studies, avoiding complex
modifications. Part of the engineering
The A350-900 can accommodate a
development, for example, involved
broad range of cabin configurations from
the relocation of sensors in the fuel
economy-led three-class arrangements
system enabling existing tanks to carry
to a more premium-orientated layout,
the maximum fuel load for the ULR.
with a level of comfort perfect for ultra-
This dispensed of the need for
long-range operations. Singapore Airlines’
additional fuel tanks.
A350-900ULR configuration is tailored for
high-comfort, ultra-long-haul flights with
a large number of business class berths.
8102
-
26#TSAF
73
Ultra Long Range A350 XWB
A350-900 Ultra Long Range
Dimensions Capacity Performance
Overall length 66.80 m Pax Customisable Range 18 000 Km / 9700 nm
Cabin length 51.04 m Typical cruise speed M0.85
Fuselage width 5.96 m Freight Max LD3 capacity underfloor 16 Max ramp weight 280.90 tonnes
Max cabin width 5.61 m Max pallet capacity underfloor 5 Max take-off weight 280.00 tonnes
Wing span (geometric) 64.75 m Bulk hold volume 11.3 m3 Max landing weight 205.00 tonnes
Height 17.05 m Total volume (bulk loading) 82.9 m3 Max zero fuel weight 192.00 tonnes
Track 10.60 m Max fuel capacity 165 000 litres
Wheelbase 28.66 m
What is Airspace?
Airspace is Airbus’ cabin brand. The A350-900ULR
features an Airspace cabin for maximum comfort.
Airlines have to differentiate the experience they offer
from that of their competitors in the age of instant
and far-reaching passenger reviews on social media.
Hundreds of details come together to make one airline
cabin superior to another but space, comfort and
ambience are probably the biggest contributors to
overall in-flight well-being.
These are Airspace’s biggest attributes. It takes the
best of the ultramodern A350 XWB cabin already flying
today to create a unique experience.
At the heart of the Airspace cabin ‘DNA’ are the
advanced technologies developed for the A350 XWB
Family. Key enablers include more spacious lavatories,
larger storage bins, adaptable full-LED lighting and
unique entrance features. Airspace also offers excellent
cabin crew and galley facilities that lead directly to
better service.
egatireH
etaroproC
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
otohP
FAST
There wouldn’t be any future
without the experience of the past.
from the past
Many years ago, passengers already enjoyed
comfortable seats and overhead lighting.
Today, however, the Airspace by Airbus concept
takes passengers to infinitely higher levels of
comfort (see page 37), contributing to their overall
well-being during flight.
8102
-
26#TSAF
83
06#TSAF
34
Around the clock, around the world
Airbus has more than 300 field representatives, based in over 130 cities
Technical, Material & Logistics
USA/CANADA Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Spares RTN/USR, WSP and HMV Orders
Tel: +1 703 834 3484 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400
For Europe, Africa, Middle East,
Fax:+1 703 834 3464 Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 3500
Asia-Pacific & China: Please contact your
airtac@airbus.com
dedicated Single Point of Contact (SPOC).
CHINA
More info:
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 AOG Spares Centre of Competence
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162
For Europe, Africa, Middle East, Fax:+49 (0)40 5076 4012
Asia-Pacific & China: ifd.spares@airbus.com
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001
ADMINISTRATION For Americas:
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3936 Please contact your dedicated
aog.spares@airbus.com
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964 Single Point of Contact (SPOC).
For Americas: More info:
Tel: +1 70 3729 9000 cod.americas@airbus.com
Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
aog.na@airbus.com
Training centres
Airbus Training Centre Airbus Training Centre Americas Training by Airbus Jakarta
Toulouse, France Miami, Florida - U.S.A. antoine.renaud@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 82 24 Tel: +1 (305) 871 3655 (switchboard)
or +33 (0)5 61 93 39 75 Fax: +1 (305) 871 4649 Airbus Asia Training Centre Singapore
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094 miamicustomertrainingsales@airbus.com Tel: +65 6877 4300 (reception)
training.commercial@airbus.com contact.info.aatc@airbus.com
customercare.atc-europe@airbus.com Airbus Training Centre Beijing
Tel: +86 (10) 6148 7700 Airbus Mexico Training Centre
Airbus Maintenance Tel: +52 55 57 86 80 50
Training Centre Airbus Training Centre Bangalore (communication and marketing)
Hamburg, Germany Tel: +91 080 6638230 (reception) training.commercial@airbus.com
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288
Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8598 Airbus Training Centre Delhi Training by Airbus Korea,
training.commercial@airbus.com Tel: +91 988 0065511 Seoul, South Korea
atc.hamburg@airbus.com Tel: +82 (0)32 882 5425
Training by Airbus Dubai, andrew.rapson@airbuskorea.com
Airbus Material Management Training UAE - Airbus Middle East FZE Dubai
Global Availability Tel: +971 4 602 78 62
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 1228 mary-knoll.garcia@airbus.com
spares.training@airbus.com
8102
-
26#TSAF
93
FOR YOU.
FLY
WE MAKE IT
With SERVICES BY AIRBUS, you get
access to the very latest innovations
in data analytics and technology
combined with Airbus’ OEM expertise.
Together let’s build new ways for
your airplane fl eet to achieve the
most effi cient and most profi table
performance for years to come.
Airbus commercial aircraft.
Services. We make it fl y.
14031_AIR_Services_Ad_297x210_MASTER_1.0.indd 1 11/09/2018 13:40
14031_AIR_Services_Ad_297x210_MASTER_1.0
11 SEPTEMBER 2018 1:40 PM | SIZE: 297X210MM | BLEED: 3MM | PUBLICATION: PRESS SERVICES MASTER | CODE:
CUTTER LASER PMS APPROVAL
14031_AIR_Services_Ad_297x210_MASTER_1.0
