E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
9
3
T
S
A
F
39
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 6
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
HUMAN FACTORS SYMPOSIUM SPARES,SUPPLIERS & 15TH PERFORMANCE &
MOSCOW,RUSSIA WARRANTY SYMPOSIUM OPERATIONS CONFERENCE
14-16 JUNE BANGKOK,THAILAND PUERTO-VALLARTA,MEXICO
The 22ndHuman Factors Symposium 12-14 MARCH 2007 23-27 APRIL 2007
took place with the theme of:‘Human This will be the 3rd regional Spares, As for every two years since 1980,
Factors as a core value at Airbus’.The Suppliers and Warranty Symposium. the 15th Performance and Operations
symposium encompassed HF strate- Following the success of the previous Conference will take place in Puerto-
gy,HF training,operations and threat, symposia in Hainan and Athens,this Vallarta. Flight crews, operations
error management in flight operations, regional symposium for the Middle specialists, flight operations engin-
ATC and maintenance. Particular East, Asian and Pacific regions will eers, and performance specialists
importance was given to the Human present progress made from the from all Airbus operators are invited
Factors Toolkit Project, which is previous symposia and provide the to attend and actively participate in
intended to reconcile Human Factors latest news concerning current initia- this event,which will offer numerous
theory with operational guidance. tives in all three areas. opportunities to constructively ex-
The event was sponsored by ICAO The symposium will be an opportuni- change views and information, and
and IAC (Interstate Aviation ty for customers in these regions to increase mutual cooperation and
Committee) of the CIS (Common- exchange and express views con- communication. The conference will
wealth of Independent States). cerning their daily practice and expe- address many operational topics
riences,with the continual aim from covering all Airbus aircraft models in
TRAINING SYMPOSIUM Airbus and suppliers to assist in various sessions such as Looking
SAN FRANCISCO,USA reducing operating costs. Speakers Ahead, CNS/ATM (Communication,
2-5 OCTOBER 2006 from Airbus and suppliers will both be Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic
The 8th Training Symposium was an present and available to discuss Management), Flight Economics,
arena not only to present continuing spares,supplier and warranty related e-Documentation, Operations, Perf-
improvements in the training topics. ormance,Electronic Flight Bag…
processes, but also to listen to the On-line sessions and workshops are Invitations for the conference will be
customers views on existing systems planned for an interactive and sent soon.
and thoughts on future solutions.Four dynamic exchange of information at
separate conference streams covered the end of the symposium.
pilot training, cabin crew training,
maintenance training and simulation A320 FAMILY SYMPOSIUM
& training technologies.These com- BANGKOK,THAILAND
07-11 APRIL 2007
plemented an exhibition featuring the
Airbus will propose a basic agenda
latest developments in these fields.
that will be merged with customer Inspired by the background of the
suggestions,concentrating on major
Golden Gate,speakers introduced the
concerns that will likely be based on theme of bridges to link the elements
FAIR (Forum for Airline Issues
of the conference and strongly
Resolution) inputs. It is planned to
emphasized the necessity of building
cover all presentations in the main links between the three essential ele-
session.As usual,adequate facilities
ments of the training model – good
will be available for side meetings. instructors, good programmes and
The formal invitation letters as well good training media as well as the
as the preliminary agenda will be
other critical bridge between the
sent no later than February 2007. instructor and trainee.
The event brought together 81 air-
lines,9 MROs,5 authorities and sup-
pliers from around the world.
93
TSAF
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Thorsten Eckhoff
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3463@
CHINA Customer Support Centres
Training centres
Peter Tiarks
Spares centres / Regional warehouses Senior Director Customer Support
Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM) Tel: +86 10 804 86161 Ext 5040
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63 RCSM location Country RCSM location Country
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates London United Kingdom
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT ADMINISTRATION
Ajaccio France Louisville United States of America
Jean-Philippe Guillon Algiers Algeria Luanda Angola
Director Almaty Kazakhstan Luton United Kingdom
Resident Customer Support Administration Al-Manamah Bahrain Macau S.A.R. China
Amman Jordan Madrid Spain
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02 Amsterdam Netherlands Manchester United Kingdom
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Athens Greece Manila Philippines
Auckland New Zealand Mauritius Mauritius
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Baku Azerbaijan Memphis United States of America
Airbus has its main spares centre in Hamburg, Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei Mexico City Mexico
Bangalore India Miami United States of America and regional warehouses in Frankfurt,
Bangkok Thailand Milan Italy
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Barcelona Spain Minneapolis United States of America
Beijing China Montreal Canada
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Beirut Lebanon Moscow Russia
Berlin Germany Mumbai India
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Brussels Belgium Nanchang China
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Bucuresti Romania Nanjing China
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Buenos Aires Argentina New York United States of America
Cairo Egypt Newcastle Australia
support.airtac@airbus.com Casablanca Morocco Ningbo China
Charlotte United States of America Noumea New Caledonia Spares AOGs in North America should be
Chengdu China Palma de Mallorca Spain
addressed to: Cologne Germany Paris France
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Colombo Sri Lanka Paro Bhutan
Fax: +1 (703) 729 4373 Copenhagen Denmark Phoenix United States of America
Dalian China Pittsburgh United States of America
Spares AOGs outside North America Damascus Syria Prague Czech Republic
Delhi India Quito Ecuador
should be addressed to:
Denver United States of America Rome Italy
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 4001 Detroit United States of America Sana’a Yemen
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 4011 Dhaka Bangladesh San Francisco United States of America
aog.spares@airbus.com Doha Qatar San Salvador El Salvador
Dubai United Arab Emirates Santiago Chile
Spares related HMV issues outside Dublin Ireland Sao Paulo Brazil
Dusseldorf Germany Seoul South Korea
North America should be addressed to:
Fort Lauderdale United States of America Shanghai China
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 4003 Frankfurt Germany Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 4013 Guangzhou China Shenyang China
hmv.spares@airbus.com Haikou China Shenzhen China
Hangzhou China Singapore Singapore
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Hanoi Vietnam Sydney Australia
Helsinki Finland Taipei Taiwan
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Hong Kong S.A.R. China Tashkent Uzbekistan
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Indianapolis United States of America Tehran Iran
Istanbul Turkey Tokyo Japan
Airbus Training subsidiaries Izmir Turkey Toulouse France
Miami, USA - Florida Jakarta Indonesia Tulsa United States of America
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Johannesburg South Africa Tunis Tunisia
Karachi Pakistan Varna Bulgaria
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Kita-Kyushu Japan Vienna Austria
Beijing, China Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Washington United States of America
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Kuwait city Kuwait Wuhan China
Lanzhou China Xi'an China
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76
Larnaca Cyprus Zurich Switzerland
Lisbon Portugal 41
J U L Y 2 0 0 5
93
TSAF
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Publisher:Bruno Piquet
Editor:Kenneth Johnson
Graphic Designer:Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Authorization for reprint of FAST Magazine articles should be requested
from the editor at the FAST Magazine e-mail address given below
Customer Services Communications
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
E-mail:fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer:Escourbiac
FAST Magazine may be read on Internet
http://www.content.airbusworld.com/SITES/Customer_services/index.html
under ‘Quick references’
ISSN 1293-5476
© AIRBUS S.A.S.2006.AN EADS COMPANY
All rights reserved.Proprietary document
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter “Magazine”),you accept on behalf of
your company to comply with the following.No other property rights are granted by the
delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it,for the sole purpose of information.
This Magazine,its content,illustrations and photos shall not be modified nor repro-
duced without prior written consent of Airbus S.A.S.This Magazine and the materials
it contains shall not,in whole or in part,be sold,rented,or licensed to any third party
subject to payment or not.This Magazine may contain market-sensitive or other infor-
mation that is correct at the time of going to press.This information involves a number
of factors which could change over time,affecting the true public representation.
Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in this document or
with respect to the information described herein.The statements made herein do not
constitute an offer or form part of any contract.They are based on Airbus information
and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation is given as to their
accuracy.When additional information is required,Airbus S.A.S can be contacted to
provide further details.Airbus S.A.S shall assume no liability for any damage in con-
nection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,even if Airbus S.A.S
has been advised of the likelihood of such damages.This licence is governed by French
law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals of Toulouse (France)
without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for infringement of copy-
right or any other intellectual property right in any other court of competent jurisdiction.
Airbus,its logo,A300,A310,A318,A319,A320,A321,A330,
A340,A350,A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
This issue of FAST Magazine has been printed
Photo copyright Airbus
on paper produced without using chlorine,to reduce
Photo credits:
Airbus Photographic Library,exm company,F.Espinasse,H.Goussé,P.Jalby, waste and help conserve natural resources.
M.Lindner,P.Masclet,S.Ognier,S.Ramadier, Every little helps!
1
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 6
39
Performance monitoring of 2
In-Flight Entertainment systems
Airbus vision
Marc Virilli & Joerg Reitmann
Electrical Load Analysis 12
Maintaining the electrical load integrity
of your aircraft
Régis Barneron
Cargo configurations 19
Flexible upgrades for A320 Family aircraft
Sonia Bouchardie
Maintenance cost and reliability control 27
Services to better serve airlines worldwide
Johan De Buck & Thierry Brugidou
Phoning in flight 35
Voice and data communications with
the GSM on-board system
Emeline Baur
In-Flight Entertainment 40
Part II
Customer Services 41
Around the clock...Around the world
3
93
TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
The rational behind Emirates pro- who’s job is to operate a complex
posal is the current difficulty to system, the impact of a given failure
obtain easily and rapidly a clear at seat level has a more critical
and actual picture of how IFE per- effect. Although IFE systems are
forms during daily operation. The not dispatch critical from an air-
situation as perceived from an air- line’s MEL (Minimum Equipment
framer standpoint, is quite similar. List) standpoint, they are dispatch
Although IFE systems are BFE critical from a commercial point of
(Buyer Furnished Equipment), view. For this reason it is essential to
they are installed and integrated in have a collective ability to antici-
the aircraft by the airframer. Once pate and obtain in advance the right
Example of Operational
an aircraft is in service and unless information to enable provision of a Reliability for Operational
specific follow-up is put in place high availability level of IFE to pas- Interuptions of more
with an airline and their IFE sup- sengers, as well as a clear view of its than 15 minutes
plier, airframers are not aware of overall performance over time.
Aug 05 Sep 05 Oct 05 Nov 05 Dec 05 Jan 06 Feb 06 Mar 06 Apr 06 May 06 Jun 06 Jul 06
how IFE behaves until a customer Monitoring IFE
complains, or until the level of
health today
Operational Interruption (OI)
reaches a level where it impacts
aircraft operational reliability As rightly mentioned by Emirates,
(see illustration above). This also monitoring the health of an IFE
applies to other cabin BFE items system today consists of providing
such as seats and galleys. accurate information in real time
on what is going wrong between
In most cases IFE system perfor- 2,000 interconnected LRUs (Line
mance perception is based on a few Replaceable Units) and several lay-
high visibility events which are not ers of software including data trans-
representative of the overall level portation, operating systems,
of performance of the system (but Graphical User Interfaces (GUIs),
still need to be taken into account third party applications, etc.
and addressed), or on seat avail-
ability figures produced by IFE Several of these, both hardware and
suppliers which depend on each software, come from the consumer
individual contract signed with market and are off-the-shelf ele-
each airline. ments. In other words - not specifi-
cally adapted to the typical require-
Because IFE systems are utilized ments of the aeronautical world, as
by final users who have paid for a you may see on the illustration on
service and not only by people the right.
3
93
TSAF
Performance
monitoring of In-Flight
Entertainment
systems
Airbus vision
In the last issue of FAST Magazine 38, July 2006, Both solutions would involve transmission of data
Emirates made two valuable proposals aimed at to the ground.
improving In-Flight Entertainment (IFE) perfor-
mance monitoring for the future. As promised in our last issue of FAST Magazine,
we propose you to share with you in more detail
One proposal is based on the use of the Aircraft Airbus vision for the future for IFE systems trend
Condition Monitoring System (ACMS) and the monitoring and enhanced maintenance processes.
other is more based on an IFE built-in solution.
Marc Virilli Joerg Reitmann
Senior Director Cabin and Cargo Systems Vice President and Executive
Airbus Customer Services Expert Cabin Complete Systems
Head of GAHMMArchitectures
Airbus Engineering
2
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
WHAT IS AVAILABLE FOR IFE expected in the avionics world) and
MONITORING TODAY? a very high amount of software
developed by various different
One of the tools existing today to sources, before being integrated in
monitor the health of the IFE an open platform.
system is Built-In Test Equipment
(BITE) plus the use of a Central The result observed today is either
Maintenance System (CMS) or a incomplete and/or inaccurate BITE
Cabin Management Terminal (CMT). data given to mechanics, or obscure
information that requires specific
skills to be interpreted before it
leads to the right action on the air-
craft. Although not perfect, this is
what is available today and a huge
amount of work is done by the IFE
suppliers and the airframer to
improve as much as possible the
reliability and accuracy of this data.
Once this information is available, time, type of material used, number Furthermore, the specificity of IFE
the Aircraft Communication, of resets done by cabin crew during is the number of equipments of dif-
Addressing and Reporting System a flight and so on, all of which are ferent nature, which are highly
(ACARS) network allows easy not captured by seat availability. As software driven and some of which
transmission to the ground where a matter of fact, seat availability interact directly with passengers.
tools such as AIRMANTM (*) can figures are regularly quite high, but Reliability analysis as done for
use it to enable preparation of customer satisfaction at the end avionics is consequently less rele-
maintenance actions to return does not necessarily correspond vant, as it is more related to LRU
faulty systems to normal operation with these figures. hardware failure, rather than soft-
in anticipation of the aircraft actu- ware anomaly or passenger misuse
ally landing. AIRMANTM fully Seat availability figures (see illus- or misunderstanding.
applies to IFE, which from this per- tration above) must be balanced
spective is an aircraft electronic with the actual service to the pas- As far as DMC is concerned, its
system amongst others. The limits senger; typically a noisy audio computation considers only main-
explained previously and the fact channel will not necessarily be tenance off-aircraft (shop activi-
that BITE information will not be counted as a non-available seat, but ties: Repairs, test costs, spares
representative of the actual system will be reported as a nuisance by prices, etc.). All work performed
behaviour as perceived by the pas- the customer. Similarly, slow during line maintenance and all
senger, makes it difficult to use as response times can be noticed by consumable usage is not measured.
the right or sole source of data to passengers (reported or not to the This also contributes to the poor
determine the IFE system perfor- crew), but the causes may not auto- pertinence of such an indicator for
In recent years Airbus has started to mance level. matically be detected by the IFE IFE systems.
adapt the monitoring techniques system.
and algorithms used for the rest of A second tool to monitor the
the aircraft’s electronics systems to health of an IFE system is the seat Finally, a third tool at our disposal
the IFE. The concept is certainly availability data produced by IFE to monitor the health of an IFE
right, indicating to an airline suppliers. system is reliability and DMC
mechanic which LRU to remove, or (Direct Maintenance Cost) data.
which portion of wiring to trouble The limits here are the consistency
shoot is a praiseworthy objective, of the raw data used from one cus- The reliability of IFE LRUs is
but very difficult to achieve for an tomer to another, and that an IFE measured as for any other avionic
IFE system. supplier is more interested in mea- system (Mean Time Between
suring system behaviour against a Unscheduled Removals, Mean
BITE in general is a very good tool specification rather than against the Time Between Failures, No Fault
to monitor hardware failure - there satisfaction of the final user. Final Found percentage... figures), but
is no doubt about this. However, as user dissatisfaction could also come this measurement is not available
mentioned earlier, an IFE system is from issues like brightness, user on a regular basis for all part num-
built partly from off-the-shelf parts friendliness, response time, tempo- bers, making it difficult to consoli-
(which are not designed to be nec- rary interruption of service, distur- date an IFE reliability indicator for
essarily deeply monitored as bance, noise, video quality, rest the system or sub-systems of it.
93
TSAF
4 5
93
TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
Example of seat availability graph
(*) AIRMANTM(AIRcraft
Maintenance ANalysis) developed
by Airbus is a tool for data
analysis.Its objective is to help
airline maintenance departments
to anticipate unscheduled
maintenance events and to take
decisions in the frame of
troubleshooting.
Refer to FAST Magazine 29,
December 2001,for a description
of an early version of AIRMANTM.
5
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
93
TSAF
6 7
93
TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
IFE health for a few entries into service, but is
a very time consuming exercise,
monitoring -
requiring a lot of interpretation of
One step forward write-ups (inaccurate write-ups or
different wording for the same fail-
ure) and needing full cabin crew
If an achievement needed is a real cooperation for entry of each event
time view of the IFE system per- and proactive monitoring of pas-
formance as perceived by its final senger usage of the system.
users (cabin crew and passengers),
as well as trend monitoring of this Thanks to the latest developments
performance over time to be able to of on-board open platforms and
quantify the impact of system possible hosted applications, the
improvements and/or evolution, cabin e-logbook products give the
one solution is to use the cabin log- possibility to receive standardized
book as a prime source. logbook write-ups recorded in an
electronic format. This provides
This type of exercise (paper cabin opportunities to receive more accu-
logbook analysis) is usually done rate feedback from passengers and
in the scenario described by cabin crew (closer to their in-flight
Airbus e-logbook snapshots Emirates (case by case survey upon experience), even if it is probable IFE will be captured. This point IFE Maturity Tool (IMT) during Logical schematic of IFE tool
request). It has been done at Airbus that not all events experienced with could be addressed in the future by A380 development.
providing passengers a light log- OMT:On-board Maintenance Terminal
book-like interface to directly As explained previously, IMT is OMS:On-board Maintenance System
FAP:Flight Attendant Panel
input their perception of the system based on use of the electronic
OIT:On-board Information Terminal
behaviour for a given flight on cabin logbook using standard cabin MEL:Minimum Equipment List
their personal screen (See illustra- defects to ease cabin crew entries
tions on the previous page). and consequently encourage cap-
ture of every IFE related event in
Thanks to the user friendliness of the cabin (this is already in place
personal computer based applica- with the dedicated IFE paper log-
tions, capturing a cabin event book used by some Airbus cus-
efficiently and consistently across tomers). These cabin events can
all cabin crews becomes much then be transmitted to the ground
easier than today. Consequently, and compared with the exact air-
analysis of a ‘standard defect’ is craft cabin configuration and level
also much easier to model to pro- of service proposed to all passen-
duce indicators of how a given gers to deduce the IFE performance
function/system behaves over perceived by passengers and cabin
time. This was prototyped as an crew for a given flight.
7
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
In addition to trend monitoring,
which would be the only one valid
for performance at a given airline
and for a given system, IMT allows
microanalysis of each event con-
tributing to a given degradation
thanks to the history of all logbook
data or information in the database
with associated detailed informa-
Different types of weighting fac- tion (test results, removal/installa-
tors can also be applied depending tion data, etc.).
on seat class, type of service,
impact on service, etc. to balance The future of IFE
the IFE availability calculation.
health monitoring
IMT also allows comparison of and management
performance between two different
IFE systems, two given aircraft ser-
ial numbers (MSNs), two given air- As described in the previous sec-
lines, or two given aircraft types. tion of this article, IFE usage and
This gives a powerful tool for IFE performance data recording is nec-
trend monitoring and quantifica- essary for the monitoring and man-
tion of benefits brought by system agement of complex network sys-
evolution. As a further step, future tems like IFE. Focusing only on
extension of the tool to seats, gal- LRU failures and corresponding
IFE trend monitoring graph leys, etc, would provide cabin trend indicators does not provide ade-
monitoring. quate performance results. To suc-
ceed, all the actors involved need to
work together and share data avail-
able at airlines, Airbus and suppli-
ers. One consolidated/harmonized
database with different user access
rights to different data subsets is an
attractive solution.
This approach is part of a broader
programme at Airbus that aims at
enhancing aircraft availability with
world-class solutions and reducing
maintenance costs. This programme
called GAHMM (Global Aircraft
Health Monitoring & Management)
is addressing the whole aircraft and
includes the vision of four particu-
lar steps for the IFE.
93
TSAF
8 9
93
TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
STEP 1
IFE failure vs impact on services matrix Example of IFE audio failure STEP 1
CONSOLIDATION OF AIRCRAFT DATA
at seat 10B (B/C class) Consolidation of OMS BITE reports with
Music Video ... Connectivity
logbook
Building upon the work which has
IFIFEE a auuddioiof faailiulurree 00 00 ...... 11
already started, the tools which are
... ... ... ... ... Seat configuration matrix:Seat/Services
currently available or about to be
IFE RJ45 audio failure 1 1 ... 0 Music Video ... Connectivity
available (see IMT page 7) and
... ... ... ... ...
IFE seat reset 0.5 0.5 ... 0 Seat 1A 1 1 ... 1 depending on the reliability of raw
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... source data and actual usage of e-
IFE failure Z 0 0 ... 0 Seat 10B 1 1 ... 1 logbook, the next step is probably
... ... ... ... ... consolidating/complementing the
Seat 80F 1 1 ... 0 e-logbook information with data
gathered by the OMS (On-board
Seat availability matrix:Seat/Services Maintenance System), IFE BITE
and/or IFE data collected through Music Video ... Connectivity
ACMS (Aircraft Condition Monit-
Seat 1A 15 30 ... 3 oring System) as suggested by
... ... ... ... ... Emirates.
Seat 10B 00 00 ... 2 (cid:1)Low level of
... ... ... ... ... consistency between
STEP 2 the different IS systems
Seat 80F 5 10 ... 0
CONSOLIDATION OF GROUND (cid:1)IFE is not using ACMS
DATABASES (cid:1)Lack of performance and usage data
(cid:1)Fault detection is dominating
The IFE suppliers have developed
databases in past years to gather
performance indications for their STEP 2
Consolidation of various existing data bases
systems to define areas for
improvement and also to give a
certain visibility to their cus-
tomers about the in-service
behaviour of their IFE (the limita-
tions of this were highlighted pre-
viously).
The airlines have in-house a lot of
information about parts removed,
time spent on aircraft, recurrent
actions conducted, logbook com-
plaints and corresponding actions,
commercial critical item list, etc.
The airlines are also the first node
of the network when data is
retrieved from the aircraft (auto-
matically or manually).
(cid:1)Full consistency between
the different IS systems
Finally, the airframer also gathers
data for aircraft performance
monitoring, for maintenance antic-
ipation through AIRMANTM,
e-logbook information will soon
become available, etc.
towards a rationalized data distri-
This current fragmented process bution amongst the actors (com-
leads to a situation where all this plementary databases) with an
information is sometimes redun- interface tool that would allow
dant and stored twice or more, each to extract the most benefit
sometimes not shared, sometimes from the data available, whether
not used, sometimes not useful,… it is stored within the airline,
There is a real need to converge supplier or Airbus.
9
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
11
93
TSAF
PERFORMANCE MONITORING OF IFE SYSTEMS - AIRBUS VISION
Conclusion
11
93
TSAF
STEP 3 As described previously in this STEP 4
STEP 4
DETERMINING PERTINENT DATA article and highlighted by REMOTE IFE MAINTENANCE Remote access of IFE
Emirates, an IFE system is a net-
The corner stone of ‘diagnostic work system which is highly soft- The previous steps set the condi-
performance and usage data moni- ware driven. Optimizing IFE per- tions necessary for good IFE heath
toring’improvement is the defini- formance demands that pertinent monitoring in the future, but going
STEP 3 tion of an appropriate set of data data, giving performance indica- further in this domain certainly
Improved diagnostic performance required by different users. tions of hardware, network and means better usage of remote
and usage data monitoring software is available. The monitor- access techniques.
ing implemented must be adapted
to the technology used, and the Preparing work in advance for an IFE System (network & information)
resulting information available to LRU change will save time. Better OMS/ACMS
Performance
the appropriate population with the visibility can be offered to an air- at a and usage
right level of detail. line, the IFE suppliers and the air- h d monitoring
alt
framer by providing the right data h e
E Fault data
The OMS and ACMS can be used through appropriate ground moni- I F
complementarily to achieve this toring tools.
objective, as used for the engines,
and as also suggested by Emirates. The same tools can gather informa-
tion to steer new developments, but
These are the key requirements: improvements can also be obtained (cid:1)Data acquisition parameters can
• To prepare the right by performing a number of tasks in now be changed
maintenance action in a remote way, as done for the main- (cid:1)Sharpening of diagnostic models
anticipation of aircraft landing tenance of desktop personal com- (cid:1)System recovery action possible from the ground (such as seat reset)
• To minimize the time spent on puters, for example adjustment
aircraft to rectify a default monitoring parameters, remote
(cid:1)All users have access to performance • To monitor IFE system seat reset, remote memory dump
and fault data performance over time and remote software update. CONTACT DETAILS
(cid:1)Full benefit taken from OMS function
and ACM function • To get a fast time-to-get-a-fix Marc Virilli Joerg Reitmann
(cid:1)All users get the same data base with • To define system improvements Senior Director Vice President and Executive
different levels of details for the longer term Cabin and Cargo Systems Expert Cabin Complete Systems
Airbus Customer Services Head of GAHMM Architectures
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 46 41 Airbus Engineering
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 44 25 Tel:+49 40 743 73586
marc.virilli@airbus.com Fax:+49 40 743 81500
joerg.reitmann@airbus.com
Conclusion
Airbus shares the diagnostic made by trend monitoring. How can it be ensured
Emirates - room for improvement exists in this data is accurate and available, how
IFE performance monitoring. A first set of can it be shared between IFE suppliers,
bricks exists today, such as BITE, airframers and airlines, who is responsible
AIRMANTMand e-Logbook that can be for this data and similar issues are being
used to automatically produce data to addressed.
allow more precise monitoring of IFE
A communication path to transmit this
performance, but in all cases the key point
information to the ground and a ground tool
is completeness and reliability of the raw
to process it will easily be defined, but again
information.
pertinence of the raw data will be the key.
Emirates have provided their view for a
Airbus cannot unilaterally define
path to improvement that could be taken
requirements for the other actors on this
into account in current work.
subject, and therefore the GAHMM
Activities are underway at Airbus to assess programme will be used as a vector for a
which data is required for IFE maintenance, collaborative approach with airlines and
which is required for engineering product suppliers to specify joint requirements for
improvement and which is required for future IFE system monitoring.
10
13
93
TSAF
ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT
13
93
TSAF
Electrical
Electrical load
data in three
Load Analysis
different formats
Maintaining the electrical load
Microsoft ExcelTM file
integrity of your aircraft
This file contains only the electri-
cal load data (without the table of
contents, introduction, or total
loads). Using ExcelTM standard
XXX
functions, operators can use this
The Electrical Load Analysis (ELA) reflects the for each aircraft due to any post delivery modifi- file to compute the electrical load
electrical load data status at the time of aircraft cations. An accurate ELA can then be produced data within the worksheet table.
delivery. It gives details of the electrical loads on and maintained for monitoring by the local air- Additionally, using the ExcelTMfil-
each of the individual electrical busbars. For the worthiness authorities. ter tool eases the data selection
aircraft delivered previously, it was only supplied and retrieval process.
as a paper manual with no post delivery revisions. An important additional evolution is that previ-
This data formed the basis for operators to calcu- ously operators received an ELA that represented
PDFTM file format
late and maintain a record of all changes to the the first of each aircraft version delivered, but
aircraft electrical loads subsequent to any modi- since March 2005, Airbus now supplies an ELA
This file represents the master
fication of the aircraft systems, throughout the for each aircraft delivered. The ELA covers all
record of the aircraft electrical
operational life of the aircraft. Airbus aircraft types except the A300 B2/B4.
loads status at aircraft delivery.
This file is non-modifiable.
Airbus has now developed a new enhanced ELA
that ensures operators can make full use of the
electrical load data, while at the same time, main-
The complete ELA in
tain and record any changes to the electrical loads a Rich Text Format (RTF)
XXX
This file can be modified by oper-
Régis Barneron ators. This gives operators the
ELA Product Manager opportunity to update and main-
Technical Data Support & Services
tain a current version of the ELA.
Airbus Customer Services
This version of the ELA can be
made available to local authorities
if required.
12
Electrical load Engineering Order. To do this the The decision tree can be used as
nominal power, the maximum an aid to assess the compatibility
changes following
value and the operational valuefor of the aircraft electrical system to
an aircraft each flight phase must be deter- ensure the proposed aircraft mod-
mined (if the actual operational val- ification complies with the above
modification
ues cannot be determined then the rules in the various electrical con-
maximum load values should be figurations.
Using the design assumptions used). These changes to the electri-
shown in paragraph 7 of the ELA cal loads must be analysed to ensure Similarly, when an Airbus Service
introduction to compute the elec- and maintain the electrical load Bulletin (SB) affects the aircraft
trical load changes due to air- integrity of the aircraft electrical dis- electrical loads, the changes,
craft modification, an operator can tribution system in accordance with including any changes to the
modify an aircraft by means of an the following four guidance rules: affected C/Bs, are indicated in a
dedicated paragraph of the SB.
The values given will indicate
any increase or decrease in the
electrical loads following the
accomplishment of the SB.
The figure on the right shows the
Airbus SB A340-24-4031 cover-
ing the installation of a new
Electrical Contactor Management
Unit (ECMU) standard on an
A340 aircraft.It indicates that the
affected C/Bs 37XN and 25XN
exist on the aircraft and C/Bs
46XN and 47XN will be added
during accomplishment of the SB.
Operators should use this infor-
mation to update their ELA for the
post SB aircraft.
How to update
and maintain the
supplied ExcelTM file
To revise the data for an existing
C/B using the ELA ExcelTM file,
select the C/B concerned and add
the maximum and the operational
electrical loads listed in the SB or
airline Engineering Order to the
existing electrical loads (as illustrat-
ed in the figure on the right).
For all new additional C/Bs, rows to
cover relevant new maximum and
operational loads are inserted in the
file and completed with the electri-
cal load data as given in the SB or
airline Engineering Order. Using the
ExcelTM autosum function insert the
revised totals of both the maximum
and operational loads for all flight
phases (as illustrated in the figure on
the right).
15
93
TSAF
ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT
15
93
TSAF
Airbus SB A340-24-4031
(cid:1)Guidance rule 1
The new busbar load does not exceed the maximum authorized load
(cid:1)Guidance rule 2
The new total busbar load (permanent + intermittent) must not exceed the busbar Circuit Breaker (C/B)
trip time.(The C/B trip times are compatible with the modified electrical circuit)
(cid:1)Guidance rule 3
The new total loads do not exceed the Transformer Rectifier (T/R) nominal value (e.g.for the A340 this is
5,600 watts)
(cid:1)Guidance rule 4
The generator loads do not exceed the generator nominal power (for the A340 this is 75KVA)
Original (1) and revised (2) ELA existing C/B data
Decision tree
Checks to be made before installing a load (1)
(2)
Add new additional C/B data
14
ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT
HOW TO CHECK THAT THE MAXIMUM
BUSBAR LOADS ARE NOT EXCEEDED
Referring to the wiring manuals,
Identify the C/Bs and the generator
associated with the busbar and also
identify their current rating as
shown in the example on the right.
In this example, the new and exist-
ing C/Bs, 37XN and 47XN are
connected to the 28VDC busbar
101PP. This busbar is protected by
the existing C/B 2PN1. The nomi-
nal current rating (IN) for this C/B
is 50 amps.
To ensure the busbar 101PP is not
overloaded, calculate the maxi-
HOW TO CHECK THAT THE MAXIMUM
mum permitted busbar load:
AUTHORIZED CURRENT VALUES FOR
C/B 2PN1 DO NOT EXCEED
Maximum permitted load =
THE C/B RATING
50 amps x 28 volts = 1,400 watts
Ensure that maximum load in each Check the current rating of the cir-
flight phase does not exceed 1,400 cuit breakers connected to the bus-
watts. In this case (refer to figure bar and make sure that new loads
on the preceding page), 890.2 watts do not exceed their nominal rating.
is the maximum load, and this The circuit breaker ratings are
occurs during the descent phase. given in ASM/AWM (Aircraft
Schematic Manual/Aircraft Wiring
Because this is less than the Manual) 24-5X. Make sure that
maximum permitted load of generators and Transformer Recti-
1,400 watts, it is confirmed that fier Units (TRUs) will not be over-
busbar 101PP will not be over- loaded in all electrical configura-
loaded following the modification. tions and flight phases.
It is recommended that the busbar The max permanent current for
permanent load is lower than 85% C/B 2PN1 will be:
of maximum busbar load (refer
to Advisory Circular N°25-16 890.2 watts /28 volts = 31.8 amps
available at the FAA Website) which is less than the C/B
(http://www.airweb.faa.gov/Regula nominal current of 50 amps
tory_and_Guidance_Library/rgAd
visoryCircular.nsf/MainFrame?Op The max permanent + intermittent
enFrameSet). The revised maxi- current for C/B 2PN1 will be:
mum load in the descent phase of
890.2 watts will be the new maxi- 890.2 + 97 = 987.2 watts/28 volts =
mum load for C/B 2PN1. 35.2 amps which is less than
the 2PN1 C/B trip time
Maximum 101PP bus-bar load
(permanent) = 890.2 watts AMEND THE ELA RECORD OF
REVISIONS IN THE ‘RTF’ DOCUMENT
890.2 watts < (0,85% x 1,400 watts)
= 1,190 watts To maintain the current status of
the ELA, complete the ELA
Therefore the new 101PP busbar ‘Record of Revisions’with the ref-
load does comply with the recom- erences and dates of the incorpora-
mendations of Advisory Circular tion of the airline engineering
N°25-16. modification or Airbus SB.
93
TSAF
How to update
the RTF file
Using the revised electrical load
data for each of the affected bus-
bars as specified in the Airbus SB,
or airline Engineering Order,
update the RTF file.
In the example illustrated below, the
busbar affected is 101PP. The exist-
ing C/B 37XN has an existing load
of 5,6 watts during each flight
phase; therefore insert the revised
load, which is 22.6 watts for all
flight phases. Then insert the elec-
trical loads for all new C/Bs, in this
case C/B 47XN, which has a load of
3.0 watts for each flight phase given
by the SB or Engineering Order.
Note in this example that a maxi-
mum load of 890.2 watts occurs
during the descent flight phase.
16 17
93
TSAF
ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT
Modified wiring schematic
Updating the ‘RTF’ file
Affected busbar
Revise existing C/B
data
Insert new C/B
data
Maximum load in descent
Calculate new phase
busbar totals
Intermitten
t
17
93
TSAF
ELECTRICAL LOAD ANALYSIS - MAINTAINING THE ELECTRICAL LOAD INTEGRITY OF YOUR AIRCRAFT CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT
Cargo
configurations
Flexible upgrades
for A320 Family aircraft
A320 Family aircraft offer a number of different contour Unit Load Devices (ULDs) can be loaded
configurations in the lower deck cargo compart- if the optional cargo loading system is installed.
ments, answering the operational needs and con- Large outward opening doors allow easy access to
straints of their operators. the cargo compartments and protection from bad
weather conditions during loading.
With a wider base and higher compartment height
than equivalent aircraft, the A320 Family cargo All these features allow faster turnarounds,
compartments provide an easier and more practi- increased revenue potential and a reduction in
cal working environment. Vertical main sidewalls manpower cost. This article explains the options
allow cargo items to be stacked more easily and available for upgrading the cargo configuration by
IATA (International Air Transport Association) retrofit and their advantages.
With the introduction of the enhanced Then using the RTF version of the ELA,
ELA, operators can use the ExcelTMfile and the actual and current electrical load data
its standard functions to compute the status can be reflected and maintained by
electrical load data within the modifiable the operator, and can be shown to the
worksheet table. The availability of the Airworthiness Authorities when required.
ExcelTMfilter tool eases the data selection
Sonia Bouchardie
and retrieval process and also gives
Design Manager
operators the possibility to simulate Upgrade Operations - Systems
electrical load values. Airbus Customer Services
19
93
TSAF
‘How to use’ that cover the embodiment of
airline modifications and Airbus
instructions
SBs. For additional information,
please refer to SIL (Service
In March 2005, Airbus inserted in Information Letter) 00-080.
the ELA Introduction a compre-
hensive ‘How to Use’ the ELA, This information is also available
which provides guidance on how for download from the Technical
to maintain and keep the ELA up- Data Support and Services site on
dated. It provides several examples AirbuslWorld.
CONTACT DETAILS
Régis Barneron
ELA Product Manager
Technical Data
Support & Services
Airbus Customer Services
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 81 27
Fax:+33 (0)5 62 11 02 33
Conclusion
regis.barneron@airbus.com
18
CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT
21
93
TSAF
CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT
The aircraft can be converted to Adaptation of the configuration is
Basic full bulk configuration in forward and aft cargo compartments for all A320 Family aircraft
three main configurations: required when one or two ACTs
• Basic bulk, which allows freight (Additional Centre Tanks) are
A318 A319 A320 A321
to be loaded provisioned in the aircraft due to
• Semi-automatic cargo loading ACT restraint/support components
system, which allows pallets and (see article on ACTs in FAST
containers loading Magazine 35, December 2004).
• Semi-automatic cargo loading
system with full bulk capability, The original cargo conversion phi-
which allows freight, pallets and losophy offered:
containers loading • A semi-automatic Cargo
Loading System (CLS), to
These configurations can be fur- handle pallets and/or containers,
ther upgraded with various options. with some provisions for occa-
sional bulk as a further option Standard door nets
A320 Family lower deck or,
Standard divider nets
• Convertibility provisions which
allowed opting for either a full Optional divider nets
Convertibility bulk (previously known as kit 1)
or a semi-automatic CLS with
Bulk ULD loading
Semi-automatic CLS full bulk capability (previously
known as kit 2). It is possible to install reinforced When the panels are reinforced, the
floor panels, limited to the flat local loads are increased. The rein-
The current cargo conversion phi- floor to minimize the weight forcement can be applied to any
ULD loading ULD loading losophy superseded this in 1999 increase, for heavy bulk usage in existing floor panels from the
only and/or bulk (for A320 MSN - Manufacturer the forward and aft cargo compart- previous technology E-type to the
Serial Number - 1050 onwards, ments. current technology S-Glass and
A321 MSN 1080 onwards and features a modified build-up with
A319 MSN 1096 onwards) and for This increases the durability two additional layers of prepeg
today’s upgrades. It now offers a and impact resistance of the with increased impact resistance.
simplified principle: cargo compartment floor panels
• Semi-automatic CLS, to handle if required by operational expe-
pallets and/or containers, with rience of a customer.
some provisions for occasional Example of A320 standard/optional nets locations
bulk as a further option
Or
• Semi-automatic CLS with full
bulk capability
Cargo configuration
upgrades
advantages
CONVERSION TO FULL BULK
CONFIGURATION SYSTEM
A full bulk configuration is
installed, and structural provision
is made for attaching optional
divider nets.
Depending on aircraft type, further
optional divider nets can be
installed in the cargo compart-
ments if a more precise balance
calculation is requested by cus-
tomers to separate special cargo.
21
93
TSAF
Requirements for conversion to full bulk configuration system
(cid:1)Basic cargo compartment lining on ceiling,side and partition walls and basic
cargo compartment floor panels,capable of bulk loading up to a maximum
average load density of 15 lb/ft3
(cid:1)Centerline T-beam reinforcement
(cid:1)Standard door and divider nets as required for full bulk transport
(cid:1)Protection devices for rapid decompression panels at frame 24A
(cid:1)Net attachment points on the cargo hold floor and ceiling area
(cid:1)Tie-down points on the cargo compartment floor
(cid:1)Load and net arrangement placards
Example of arrangement in A321
forward cargo compartment
Standard door nets
Standard divider nets
Optional divider nets
20
23
93
TSAF
CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT
Containers or pallets distribution
Compartments * Optional specific container:LD3/40 - IATA Contour H
A319 Nr.1 Nr.4 Nr.5
• 2 containers or pallets in forward
cargo compartment
A319 * 4 (+2/3) ULDs • 2 containers or pallets in aft
lower deck cargo compartment.
Compartments
Nr.1 Nr.3/4 Nr.5 • 3 containers or pallets in forward
A320
CLS* + Full bulk configuration CLS* + Occasional bulk configuration cargo compartment
Usable volume Max load Usable volume Max load • 4 containers or pallets in aft
Compartment N°
m3 ft3 lb kg m3 ft3 lb kg A320 7 ULDs cargo compartment.
lower deck
1 13.11 463 7500 3402 13.11 463 4630 2100
3 9.71 343 5349 2426 9.71 343 3430 1556 Compartments
4 8.36 295 4651 2110 8.36 295 2950 1338 Nr.1/2 Nr.3/4 Nr.5 • 5 containers or pallets in forward
A321
5 Bulk only 5.88 208 3300 1497 5.88 208 3300 1497 10 ULDs cargo compartment
• 5 containers or pallets in aft
The floor structure can support, via The semi-automatic cargo loading A321 cargo compartment.
lower deck
the floor panels in the flat and slop- system improves turnaround
ing floor areas, a maximum distrib- efficiency by reducing cargo load-
uted load of 732kg/m2 (150lb/ft2), ing and unloading time (with a
while it is capable of supporting, single loader), minimizes risk
Requirements for conversion to semi-automatic cargo loading system
via ball mats or roller tracks, a of injuries to bulk loading staff
maximum distributed load of and improves customer service
(cid:1)Replacement of the standard bulk floor panels,sidewall and ceiling panels by lightweight panels
488kg/m2(100lb/ft2). (protection of cargo from wet
(cid:1)Removal of protection devices for rapid decompression panels at frame 24A
weather and theft, improved bag-
(cid:1)Installation of a drainage system with the CLS
CONVERSION TO SEMI-AUTOMATIC gage tracking, operational flexi-
CARGO LOADING SYSTEM bility, improved cargo security, (cid:1)Structural modifications allowing CLS installation and system operation
heavy cargo capability). (cid:1)Installation of modified placards for the new cargo compartment configuration
An electrically powered, semi- (cid:1)Installation of the CLS and the following associated system components:
automatic CLS is installed in This option is only available for the 1/ Restraint,guidance:Guides,latches and end stops
the forward and aft cargo compart- A319, A320 and A321. 2/ Transport:Roller tracks,ball mats
3/ Conveyance:Power drive units,control panels,proximity switches
ments allowing the transport of
ULDs (pallets/containers). The Max Gross Weight (MGW) of
each ULD is limited for the A320
Family CLS to 2500lbs (1134kg).
Different types of ULDs certified to NAS 3610
System provisions are made for a
CLS in the forward and aft cargo
compartments plus minimum elec-
trical provision for a mechanized
bulk loading system in the forward
and aft cargo compartments (aft
cargo compartments only for A318
and A319).
MGW:Maximum Gross Weight - NAS:National Aerospace Standard - IATA:International Air Transport Association
23
93
TSAF
Volume and Maximum Gross Weight (MGW)
valid for each cargo configuration for A320
Bulk configuration CLS configuration
Compartment N° Usable volume Max load Usable volume Max load
m3 ft3 lb kg m3 ft3 lb kg
1 13.28 469 7500 3402 7500 3402
Depends on ULD
3 9.76 345 5349 2426 type and contour 5000 2268
4 8.5 300 4651 2110 5000 2268
5 Bulk only 5.88 208 3300 1497 5.88 208 3300 1497
* refer to CLS configuration
for ULD loading
Semi-automatic
cargo loading system
1 Center roller track
2 Transport rollers
3 Entrance guides
4 Retractable YZ-latches
5 Lateral PDU
1
6 Longitudinal PDU
2
10 7 Continuous side guides
(optional)
9 3
8 Ball mat area
4
6 9 XZ-latches
8
7 5
4 10 Fixed YZ-guides
(with integrated rollers)
22
The semi-automatic CLS has an The following limitations apply:
option allowing occasional loading • Segregation of the cargo
of bulk cargo in addition to the compartments into sections by
CLS. This option is only available divider nets and installation of
for the A319, A320 and A321. door nets
• Each net section must be filled
Fixed provisions for occasional bulk to at least 80% of its volume
loading are provided in addition to • The cargo compartments are
the CLS (with some limitations). capable of transporting bulk up
to a maximum average density
Occasional bulk loading applies of 10lbs/ft3(160kg/m3)
on routes/destinations where no • Occasional transport of bulk
ground service equipment is load shall not exceed 60 flights
available and/or no ULDs are per year. More frequent use of
available and/or baggage re- the cargo compartments for
quirements call for maximum occasional transport of bulk
volume utilization of the cargo loads increases the possibility
compartments. of damage to the lining and
floor panels. When occasional
transport of bulk load is done
more regularly than once per
calendar week, the operator
is recommended to visually
inspect the floor panels,
linings and decompression
panels at weekly intervals
The fixed provision conversion
consists mainly of:
• Protection devices for the rapid
decompression panels and a
fender at frame 24
• Load placarding and markings
for the new cargo compartment
configuration
The required divider nets/door nets
are not part of this provision, but
should be ordered directly from the
net manufacturer.
Another option is the continu-
ous side guide to ease the
guidance of netted pallets or
slightly dished pallets.
25
93
TSAF
CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT
CONVERSION TO SEMI-AUTOMATIC
CARGO LOADING SYSTEM WITH FULL
BULK CAPABILITY
This option provides operational
capability to transport either
ULDs and/or bulk freight up to a
maximum average density of
15lbs/ft3. This is the most flexible
solution for customers who often
change modes of ground handling
operations.
It is possible to install protection
panels on the CLS and a full bulk
cargo configuration. This allows
operation with bulk cargo while
maintaining and protecting the
CLS components.
Requirements for conversion to semi-automatic cargo loading system with full bulk capability
(cid:1)Electrically powered semi-automatic CLS
(cid:1)Additional tie-down fittings
(cid:1)Door nets with stanchions and divider nets for the forward and aft cargo compartments
(cid:1)Reinforced cargo floor panels for heavy bulk usage for the forward and aft cargo compartments,
flat floor part only
(cid:1)Drainage system
(cid:1)Side wall/ceiling panels for bulk loading in the forward and aft cargo compartments
(cid:1)Fender for protection devices for the rapid decompression panels at frame 24A
Semi-automatic cargo loading
system with full bulk capability
Ceiling 1
and
1
2 sidewall
panels
for bulk
2
usage
(15lb/ft3)
3 Divider nets 3
4
Door nets
4
Reinforce
5
d floor
panels
5
25
93
TSAF
Additional protection for CLS with
occasional bulk at frame 24 (A321)
Fender
(also included for full bulk capability)
24
93
TSAF
CARGO CONFIGURATIONS - FLEXIBLE UPGRADES FOR A320 FAMILY AIRCRAFT MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE
Maintenance
cost and reliability control
Services to better serve airlines worldwide
CONTACT DETAILS
The commercial aviation industry has become services such as IDOLS, DMC benchmarking
Sonia Bouchardie more and more challenging and maintenance and other projects targeting specific issues to
Design Manager
costs and reliability control are key factors for address the challenges.
Upgrade Operations - Systems
airline success. Recognizing this, Airbus has
Airbus Customer Services
Tel:+ 33 (0)5 62 11 01 49 identified various activities, products and ser- This article describes the services offered by
Fax:+ 33 (0)5 62 11 08 47 vices, which will support airlines in their efforts Airbus to airlines to support their maintenance
Conclusion
sonia.bouchardie@airbus.com to reduce costs and increase their efficiency in the economics activities and explains their goals, ben-
maintenance economics area. These Airbus activ- efits and prerequisites. It also explains projects that
ities have resulted in a number of products and will further support airlines in the future.
Airline operations can often demand demands and can be retrofitted whatever
different cargo handling on sectors of the the current configuration of an aircraft is.
route network. This can result in bulk cargo
only on one sector and pallets or Cargo compartment configuration
containers on another sector, sometimes change offers can be obtained via a
with a small amount of bulk cargo Retrofit Modification Offer by request
included. to Airbus Upgrade Services at
upgrade.services@airbus.com
The variation in these requirements
demands flexible solutions for airlines to These cargo compartment configuration
enable them to maximize their efficiency change options are also planned to be
and revenue from cargo handling. added to the Airbus Customer Services Johan De Buck Thierry Brugidou
The A320 Family cargo configurations Upgrade Services e-Catalogue so Special Project Director Director
described in this article provide the flexible customers can review and request their Maintenance Economics & Reliability Performance Maintenance Economics & Reliability
Airbus Customer Services In-Service Data & Information System
solutions to enable airlines to meet these preferred options on-line.
Airbus Customer Services
27
93
TSAF
Lining cross-section Standard floor panel
S-glass linings It meets all Federal Aviation
Requirements and European
and floor panels
Aviation Safety Agency Requir-
ements for:
For all three configurations, the • Flammability
new enhanced cargo compartment • Low smoke/toxicity
lining and floor panels are of • Leak proof with respect to
S-glass type since September 2004 Class C (compartment
(from A318 MSN 2276, A319 classification for fire
MSN 2287, A320 MSN 2301 and extinguishing system)
A321 MSN 2305) and are sand- • Rapid decompression
wich panels with the following • Lining panels are secured
build up: with quick release attachments,
• Honeycomb core giving good accessibility
• S-glass layers to systems located behind
the lining
This S-glass enhanced floor
panel design has greater impact When a cargo compartment is
resistance, is lighter in weight converted on an in-service aircraft,
than former E-glass panels and is S-glass new technology panels
more robust for cargo handling. replace the existing panels.
Also no aluminium top sheet is
incorporated in the design.
26
29
93
TSAF
MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE
Airbus annual with their own identification code to help read the Airbus benchmark
maintenance cost
report.
benchmarking
WHY PARTICIPATE
report
IN THIS PROGRAMME?
Nowadays, airlines are becoming The annual maintenance cost
more and more concerned with benchmarking report is designed to
their Direct Maintenance Costs be an airline’s preferred means for
(DMC), since this can be an area maintenance cost optimization and
for significant cost saving opportu- gives a unique opportunity to:
nities. Therefore, it is important • Benchmark maintenance
that airlines have visibility of their performance against other
maintenance cost performance ver- airlines
sus other operators of the same air- • Forecast DMC expenditures
craft type. To help monitor their • Identify the main areas of cost
DMCs, Airbus launched the annual improvements
maintenance cost benchmarking
report in 2003. The IATA MCTF Airbus provides a downloadable
(International Air Transport Asso- on-line intuitive tool known as the
ciation Maintenance Cost Task ‘maintenance cost benchmarking
Force) has adopted this toolset as toolset’designed for data reporting,
their basic tool for DMC collec- which has a comprehensive and
tion, allowing a single reporting user-friendly interface and enables
format for both IATA and Airbus reporting levels to be chosen to
annual maintenance cost bench- allow reporting of:
marking reports. • Aircraft level (airframe,
components and engines)
THE REPORT • Check events level (from transit
to heavy checks)
Airbus issues an annual mainte- • Component level (review of top
nance cost benchmarking report cost drivers)
every year, which provides a full • Engine level (engine shop visit
range of benchmarking material costs)
from a global to a detailed level.
The benchmark graphically pre- The quality of the annual report
sents collected data, including an provided to airlines depends on the
analysis to better understand the amount and the quality of data pro-
figures presented. vided by participants via the main-
tenance cost benchmarking toolset.
There are different benchmarks, Airline data confidentiality is pre-
with a maturing fleet age approach, served via a confidentiality agree-
on: ment signed between each airline
• Airframe DMC (base, medium and Airbus.
and heavy maintenance)
• Component DMC
• Engine DMC
• Powerplant accessories DMC
• Total DMC cost
• Maintenance check man hours
The benchmark presents the report-
ed data as well as the adjusted data
(adjustment rules being applied for
a common sector length and labour
rate) to compare fairly airline
results in total confidentiality.
Airlines are provided individually
29
93
TSAF
MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE
I D
O L
010
S
1 00
0
1
10
0 10 1 0 1 10
01001010
I D
O L
010
S
1 00
0
1
10
0 10 1 0 1 10
01001010
I D
O L
010
S
1 00
0
1
10
0 10 1 0 1 10
01001010
In In In
- - -
s e rv c e s s e rv c e s s e rv c e s
ic
e
D ata On-Line S
er
vi ic
e
D ata On-Line S
er
vi ic
e
D ata On-Line S
er
vi
IDOLS or give a clear status of the situation
of the global Airbus fleet. Then, a
To support airline needs for measur- system of navigation (cockpit view)
Each customer has specific needs ing performance and comparing allows analysis via a drill down
that require specific solutions and with other Airbus operators, Airbus function.
‘Air+ by Airbus’ provides
has built a set of on-line services
customized support packages to
meet these needs. Tailor-made called IDOLS, which stands for ‘In- IDOLS is an evolutionary tool
solutions can cover all technical service Data On Line Services’. developed to support airline
operations because business needs and workshops are
‘Air+ by Airbus’ is a flexible The first step of IDOLS is to pro- organized regularly to propose
portfolio ranging from traditional
product support to very innovative vide tools to benchmark reliability new solutions and obtain airline
services,thus offering the performance against competitors, feedback.
(cid:1) IDOLS is also one of the modules
IDOLS cockpit
IDOLSscreens (cid:1)(cid:1) of ‘Air+ by Airbus’(see note on the
Top OR-Rate by ATA Chapter left), the comprehensive portfolio
of support and services created by
(cid:1)
Airbus to support customers in
meeting their business objectives.
IDOLS offers airlines a choice of
membership of three circles:
• All airlines are by default
Blue Circle members with
access to all general IDOLS
reports as well as to detailed
reports on their own fleet
compared to the global fleet
• Gold Circlemembers have in
addition to their Blue Circle
access rights all the detailed
data of the other Gold Circle
(cid:1)(cid:1) members. Membership of the
Gold Circle is obtained by
signing a Data Sharing
Agreement with Airbus
• The Silver Circle, also
called the Alliance Circle,
is designed for specific
airlines willing to share their
reliability data only between
themselves
The global Airbus fleet value
is also included. Access to this
circle is obtained by a specific
Data Sharing Agreement signed
by all members of the alliance
together with Airbus.
28
MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE
These services are provided by
Airbus on airline request.
Training seminars
and programmes
MAINTENANCE ECONOMICS
SEMINAR
This five-day seminar was created
to satisfy requests from airlines to
enhance their knowledge of global
management and control of main-
tenance costs, including other
aspects of operational costs, and
discuss the latest industry stan-
dards definitions.
• Maintenance programme
Only a well-structured DMC variations and adaptation to
process with performance targets, airline needs
data collection and analysis, • Engine fleet management
benchmarking and decision find-
ings enables cost reduction and The seminar speakers have a
budget control. Performance mea- background in airline, supplier,
surement must address internal air- MRO (Maintenance, Repair and
line requirements, but should also Overhaul) and maintenance activi-
be according to international stan- ties and are in similar positions in
dards to ease contractual negotia- Airbus. They are active members
tions and data sharing with other in various IATA, ATA (Air
industry members. Transport Association) Specifi-
cation 2000 groups and are pleased
The seminar agenda is compiled to to share with airlines the latest
respond to these specific needs and developments in these domains.
covers:
• Industry definitions used to The scope of the seminar is partic-
measure and exchange DMC ularly tailored for airline middle
• Supplier support standards to management of the following ser-
better negotiate initial vices: Technical support, system
provisioning, repair time, engineering, logistics, mainte-
No Fault Found (NFF) nance programme planning, pro-
policy, etc duction planning and control, line
• Build-up of maintenance maintenance, hangar mainte-
reserves and budget nance, component and engine
• Methods to control costs of maintenance, reliability, cost con-
component maintenance trol and maintenance information
• Methods to analyse DMC analysis.
• Use of Airbus maintenance and
engineering tools such as: This seminar is organized three
AIRMANTM, SB cost benefit times per year at the Airbus
model Training Centre Toulouse.
• Spares management:
Definitions and Airbus services RELIABILITY CONTROL PROGRAMME
to optimize processes TRAINING
• Make or buy decisions of airline
maintenance activities The objective of this three-day
• Maintenance contract training is to explain how to
negotiations with airline service implement streamlined RCP
providers processes within a maintenance
93
TSAF
MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE
THE MAINTENANCE COST costs per flight hour) and cost per
BENCHMARKING TOOLSET event (line, base and heavy mainte-
nance total costs). When the toolset
This has been developed to be as topics are completed, it gives access
close as possible to an airline’s to the summary of costs for air-
daily business. The main menu is frame, components and engines for
very comprehensive enabling easy material, labour and subcontracted
navigation through the different work. Access is also given to a ques-
topics, such as: tionnaire, which enables airlines to
• General information (finance, provide suggestions and feedback
accounting, fleet information…) on the toolset to Airbus. When the
• Global DMC (airframe, toolset and questionnaire are filled
components, powerplant) in, they should be sent back
• Cost Per Event (from transit to to Airbus via mail or e-mail to:
heavy checks, rotables, dmc.report@airbus.com.
consumables and engine shop)
Airline Services
Once an airline starts to fill in top-
activities
ics in the toolset, they can select
and print preliminary graphs of
their costs. Graphs can be displayed The Airline Services section deal-
for global DMC (total costs and ing with Maintenance &
Engineering performance, accom-
plishes Best Industry Practices
(BIP) audits covering the following
elements:
• Regulatory approval support
• Maintenance programme:
Development, implementation,
and optimization
• Maintenance means definition
and optimization
• Maintenance check performance
• Support package definition and
contract review
• Outsourcing preparation and
support
• Maintenance information
system: Evaluation and
specification support
This group also deals with eco-
nomic aspects of airline operations
via Entry Into Service (EIS) assis-
tance on-site.
Another aspect of Airline Services
covers aircraft performance opti-
mization through reliability and
maintenance cost reviews, covering:
• Aircraft configuration
optimization, including Service
Bulletin (SB) cost/benefit
analysis
• Top-down maintenance cost
optimization
• Long-term budget build up
• Cost management process
improvement
31
93
TSAF
A330
Example of global maintenance costs
A330/A340 C Check
Example of global check costs
30
33
93
TSAF
MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE
and engineering organization and launched an investigation with the CFM CFG (Customer Focus • Proactively address arising
covers: Data collection, analysis Goodrich Aerostructures and IAE Group) in Denver (May 2006) and issues before they become
and corrective actions, perfor- (International Aero Engines) to the IAE PMAG (Powerplant major problems: Visibility over
mance measurement and display, better understand nacelle mainte- Maintenance Advi-sory Group) in a wider fleet allows detecting
component reliability, etc. It aims nance costs and develop ways to San Diego (January 2006). potential issues earlier
at explaining the role of the RCP optimize them for both A320 Goodrich also published an article • Prioritize modification
in the context of overall aircraft Family engine types. A detailed in their ‘Field service technical sta- embodiment
operations such as: cost analysis study was performed tus – April 2006’for CFM nacelles. • Build-up LRU references
• Increasing aircraft availability using data from Goodrich’s MRO • Negotiate and control flight
and improving dispatch facilities for component overhaul As mentioned previously, nacelle hour agreements
reliability and annual parts sales over sever- maintenance costs and their specif- • Propose corrective actions in
• Minimising maintenance costs al years. This enabled the most ic cost drivers vary from one collaboration with the OEM
• Optimizing spares inventory common cost drivers to be identi- airline to another depending on (Original Equipment
costs fied for the worldwide fleet and operation, maintenance policy, Manufacturer)
gave an initial prioritization for commercial policy etc. Therefore, • Exchange information with
It also deals with Best Industry investigation. The study also a customized study per airline is airframers and the OEM
Practices processes and specific showed that cost drivers could essential. To maximize effective- • Evaluate the effectiveness of
examples of RCP outputs. vary significantly between air- ness, each study is performed chosen solutions
lines. Therefore, to have a fair using methods similar to those of
This training is run three times per assessment of real maintenance the general improvement plan, Comp@re is in a pilot phase with
year in Toulouse and can be pro- cost for an individual airline and allowing identification and priori- several Airbus business partners
vided on-site at airline request. ensure improvement actions are tization of cost drivers specific to and availability to airlines will be
cost effective for them a cus- the airline. Thus, each general announced in the future.
Additional projects tomized analysis is needed. countermeasure is re-evaluated for
its real benefit to the airline. Airbus
and initiatives
The first step was a general Furthermore, this may identify
participation in
improvement plan to address the additional countermeasures to be
A320 FAMILY NACELLES - common cost drivers identified at developed. aviation industry
worldwide fleet level, which was
CUSTOMIZING DMC IMPROVEMENTS
working groups
done by reviewing ‘counter- A customized study is currently
FOR AIRLINES
measures’ to these cost drivers, underway at one airline and
such as new and existing: Goodrich and IAE encourage other IATA MAINTENANCE COST
During the last A320 Family
• SBs airlines to contact them directly if TASK FORCE (IATA MCTF)
Technical symposium in Rhodes
• Repairs and repair limits they are interested in this service,
(23-27 May 2005) airlines raised
• Inspection and serviceable limits or if they would like to know more The IATA MCTF aims at Engin-
specific concerns about nacelle
about nacelle maintenance cost eering and Maintenance (E&M)
maintenance costs, so Airbus
Each countermeasure was evaluat- reduction. cost reduction with a focus on
ed for its cost effectiveness in mit- maintenance cost reporting, bench-
igating the top cost drivers - the COMP@RE marking and cost reductions. Its
cost saving after implementation of objectives are:
each countermeasure was com- Airbus is developing a component • Benchmark with an airline’s
pared to the cost of continuing to performance control project own historical data, or compare
operate ‘as is’today over a period called Comp@re (COMponent with leading industry practices
of several years. In the case of SBs Performance Assessment on • Define and standardize
and repairs the cost of incorpora- Reliability and Economics). The reporting of commercial airline
tion was also considered. scope of Comp@re is to measure maintenance costs
reliability and maintenance cost • Identify high cost drivers and
In addition, Goodrich developed performance of components target areas for maintenance
Maintenance Management Guide- (LRUs – Line Replaceable Units) cost reduction individually or
lines for both engine programmes. defined as rotables or repairables as a group
These assist airlines to develop that are repaired off-wing • Provide a forum for aircraft
and optimize their own nacelle (removed from the aircraft and maintenance trends
maintenance plan by providing all repaired in shop).
maintenance requirements and The MCTF has developed unique
recommendations in a single doc- Comp@rewill allow airlines to: data collection, analysis and
ument. • Have a clearer view on LRU reporting toolsets. The definitions
cost drivers and toolsets have been approved
Detailed results were presented • Benefit from Airbus and other by representatives of the airline
during operator meetings such as airlines experience industry.
33
93
TSAF
32
93
TSAF
MAINTENANCE COST AND RELIABILITY CONTROL - SERVICES TO BETTER SERVE AIRLINES WORLDWIDE PHONING IN FLIGHT - VOICE AND DATA COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE GSM ON-BOARD SYSTEM
Phoning in flight
Voice and data communications
Conclusion
with the GSM on-board system
To support airline needs for measuring accomplishes BIP audits at airline sites.
reliability, maintenance cost performance It also provides EIS assistance on-site and
and comparisons with competition, Airbus fleet performance optimization through
offers a set of products and services: reliability and maintenance cost reviews.
IDOLS, a module of Air+by Airbus, Additional projects and initiatives cover To fulfil the personal and business communica- Thanks to satellite broadband links and
is an on-line reliability performance various aspects of maintenance tion expectations of aircraft travellers, the GSM advanced lightweight technology and in total
benchmarking tool, enabling airlines to economics. Nacelle maintenance costs (Global System for Mobile communications) compliance with aviation and telecommunica-
compare their reliability performance. and optimization for both A320 Family on-board system developed by Airbus will allow tion regulatory requirements, passengers will be
engine types were recently addressed. passengers with just an ordinary GSM cell able to exchange calls and Short Message
The annual maintenance cost
phone or Smartphone to use GSM voice and Service (SMS) messages. On-board communi-
benchmarking report provides airlines a Comp@re is currently being developed to
data services in-flight on-board Airbus A320 cations will be charged directly by each mobile
toolset to monitor DMCs, which is used by measure the reliability and maintenance
Family aircraft (A318, A319, A320 and A321) operator to the passenger’s account at rates mir-
IATA MCTF to allow a single reporting cost performance of LRUs defined as
and non-Airbus aircraft. roring international roaming charges.
format for both IATA and Airbus annual rotables or repairables.
maintenance cost benchmark reports.
Airbus also participates in various aviation
Maintenance Economics Seminars cover a industry working groups such as IATA
wide range of maintenance economics MCTF and SPEC 2000, which aim to
related topics and case studies. enhance and rationalize current and future
ways of dealing with maintenance
Reliability Control Programme Seminars economics.
deal with data collection, analysis &
corrective actions, performance These services enable airlines to compare,
measurement & display, component measure and minimize their maintenance
reliability, etc. costs. Airbus is continually working on
maintenance cost initiatives and as further Emeline Baur
Manager Marketing Services
Airline Services deals with maintenance initiatives and services are developed,
Upgrade Services
& engineering performance and Airbus will provide information on these.
Airbus Customer Services
35
93
TSAF
SPEC 2000 can generate unavoidable typing
IATA/MCTF - 2006 data flow process
errors. Aircraft manufacturers
SPEC 2000 would like to collect more data
more efficiently, plus enlarge the
e-business standards scope of data and from this
improve feedback to airlines and
Aircraft manufacturers receive suppliers. From this point of view,
data from airlines mostly through Airbus has become part of the stan-
ExcelTM files or by fax, but rarely dardization initiatives with airlines,
via a standardized format file MROs and suppliers, with the
transfer. Data received by Airbus in objective to help initiate standard-
various formats requires a lot of ized reporting of data for the bene-
manual work to transpose, which fit of the whole industry.
CONTACT DETAILS
Thierry Brugidou
Johan De Buck Director Maintenance
Special Project Director Economics & Reliability
Maintenance Economics In-Service Data &
& Reliability Performance Information System
Airbus Customer Services Airbus Customer Services
Tel:+33 (0)5 62 11 08 20 Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 12 49
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 48 62 Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 48 62
johan.de-buck@airbus.com thierry.brugidou@airbus.com
34
• General Packet Radio Service
(GPRS) data services
supporting Multimedia Message
Service (MMS) and Wireless
Application Protocol (WAP)
• Call forwarding, barring and
Airborne system:
Air-to-ground link: Miniature cell network calling line identification
Communications Wireless LAN
between aircraft Control units The InmarsatTM Swift Broadband
and ground Ground infrastructure: satellite communication system
infrastructure Interconnection with (satellite modem + antenna
mounted on the fuselage exterior)
Ground public networks
connects the GSM on-board sys-
Ground home operators tem with the ground telephony
network via the Inmarsat4 satel-
lites. Communication services
will be provided over European
System countries that have adopted the
regional framework for on-board
architecture
mobile networks and provided
operating rights are obtained from
The system architecture consists the country where the aircraft is
of an airborne segment and a registered.
ground segment, plus a satellite
transport domain overlapping GSM on-board system features:
both segments as shown in the • System monitoring and
picture below. selection of data or voice
and data service mode from
The system, designed to operate the cabin
during the cruise phase of flights at • System switch-off from cockpit
least 3,000m (10,000ft) above the • 14 simultaneous
ground, offers passengers the fol- incoming/outgoing calls
lowing services: • 28 channels can be supported
• Voice with a second optional Base
• Short Message Service (SMS) Transceiver Station (BTS)
Airborne segment Satellite transport Ground segment
LMF/software loading
O & M O & M
Leaky line
Control panel antenna Satellite
LMF Satellite
system Home MSC
(BGAN*)
BTS AGS MSC/VLR
NOC GGS
Software • Modem
• DLNA Internet protocole
OBCE Aircraft • Antenna network
(GPRS home)
Cabin data GGSN/SGSN
reception
Aircraft
antenna Announcements
data
to passengers
Cabin wireless Head end Service provider Public network
37
93
TSAF
PHONING IN FLIGHT - VOICE AND DATA COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE GSM ON-BOARD SYSTEM PHONING IN FLIGHT - VOICE AND DATA COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE GSM ON-BOARD SYSTEM
The airborne of the power levels to the AGS.
System arrangement
The same detector also activates
segment
signs (‘Switch off Mobiles’) to
passengers for any system failure.
The airborne segment consists of The OBCE also integrates a
the following: filter/combiner for the RF signals of
the BTS and the OBCE noise
BASE TRANSCEIVER STATION (BTS) generators to the leaky line antenna.
The BTS has 14 channels for AIRBORNE GSM SERVER (AGS)
accessing passengers’ mobile
phones. The BTS (also known as a The AGS integrates the GSM soft-
picocell) establishes the commu- ware on-board and interconnects
nication pipe to the mobile phones the mobile phone system with
and supports all necessary system a satellite modem. The AGS con-
features like radio access, power trols the data streams between the
level control, handovers and fre- BTS and the satellite modem and
quency configuration and man- has a communication management
ages the radio frequency resources function for management of band-
to allow the mobile stations to width capacity, resources and pri-
access to the GSM on-board sys- oritization to the satellite modem
tem. A second optional BTS can for the satellite link. It also controls
be installed to increase the avail- the BTS and the OBCE (for main-
able channels to 28. tenance only) and manages parts of
the operations and maintenance
ON-BOARD CONTROL EQUIPMENT functions.
(OBCE)
The AGS also hosts the system’s
OBCE controls all cell phones in local maintenance function (LMF).
the cabin. The purpose of the Part of the AGS is also a software
OBCE, in conjunction with the (SW) loading function. LMF and
BTS, is to control the radio SW loading functions are manage-
frequency emissions of all mobile able from a standard laptop com-
phones and to prevent them from puter connected to the control
trying to connect to radio networks panel. The satellite modem used
outside the aircraft. The OBCE utilizes the InmarsatTM Swift-
ensures that mobile phones in the Broadband service and modulates
aircraft cabin cannot access the data into signals for the exter-
terrestrial networks and do not nal satellite link, which are sent
transmit any signal without control and received by the external
of the GSM on-board system. aircraft antenna. The Swift-
The OBCE is able to control Broadband system provides one
mobile stations in all frequency satellite channel at a minimum.
bands in areas overflown,
e.g.: GSM 900, GSM 1800 and
Universal Mobile Telecom-
munication System (UMTS), by
transmitting a suitable noise floor.
The power level of this noise floor
will depend upon the aircraft
altitude and is calculated by the
OBCE. An independent RF (Radio
Frequency) detector, integrated in
the OBCE permanently proves
availability of the noise floor
control emission at the output of
the OBCE. A connection between
the RF detector and AGS (Airborne
GSM Server) reports availability
37
93
TSAF
System architecture
On-board control equipment (OBCE)
BGAN:Satellite system (next generation InmarsatTMBGAN in service in 2006)
36
PHONING IN FLIGHT - VOICE AND DATA COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE GSM ON-BOARD SYSTEM
Leaky section cable
Non-leaky Leaky Non-leaky Leaky
Sector radiating
39
93
TSAF
PHONING IN FLIGHT - VOICE AND DATA COMMUNICATIONS WITH THE GSM ON-BOARD SYSTEM
CONTROL PANEL also switch them on for service elements used in any GSM mobile air-to-ground link provider’s gate-
reasons (asking passengers to operators’infrastructure such as: way. These elements regrouped
The control panel is the system power off their telephones) • The Mobile Switching Centre under the diverse routing function
interface for the crew and is • Maintenance button (MSC) managing the switching ensure the conversion and opti-
installed in the aircraft cabin. It • Maintenance interface via an of the incoming and outgoing mization of the GSM A-Bis inter-
monitors and controls the system external equipment calls face into a protocol enabling the
with push buttons (with integrated • Cockpit button giving pilots • The Visitor Location Register efficient transmission over the air-
indications) and system indication final control over the system in (VLR) completing the to-ground link.
lights. the cabin authorization process with the
• Modification of the passenger home mobile operators of the All UMTS (Universal Mobile
Three system indication lights service unit channel to replace subscribers roaming on the Telecommunication System) dev-
show: the NO SMOKING sign by a network ices are backwards compatible
• The ‘system ready’LED (Light NO GSM pictogram. A NO • The Serving GPRS Service with GSM and GPRS, so passen-
Emitting Diode), green SMOKING placard will be Node (SGSN), Gateway GPRS gers with UMTS phones can use
illuminated when the system added on each PSU unit for Service Node (GGSN) and them to access these services.
has started or is in idle mode passenger visibility border gateway supporting the
• The ‘system failure’LED, yellow GPRS core network. Overlaying the ground segment, the
illuminated in case of failure The satellite • The Ground GSM Server Operational & Management(O&M)
• The ‘service available’LED, (GGS), which is the equivalent elements ensure the management,
transport domain
green illuminated when it is of the AGS on-board the monitoring and operation of the net-
possible to use GSM on-board aircraft, reformats the traffic work (including the external com-
services Connects the airborne and the coming from the aircraft to the ponents such as the air-to-ground
ground segments with a satellite standard A-Bis interface and link and the airborne system).
Working principle of the leaky line antenna
LEAKY LINE ANTENNA link providing transportation and vice-versa.
interconnection to terrestrial ser- • The home location register, Similar to the O&M elements, the
A leaky line antenna for signal
vice providers and backbone net- which in the OnAirTMnetwork, billing element ensures the genera-
coverage of the aircraft cabin is
works.It comprises the following will only be used for the testing tion of the information necessary
installed in the ceiling along the
components: of the roaming relations. for billing purpose (e.g. Call CONTACT DETAILS
whole cabin length and distributes
• The satellite antenna that Detailed Records or CDR). This
RF signals from the OBCE and Emeline Baur
transmits and receives signals to The ground segment also includes information is mainly provided by
BTS. The frequency range of the Manager Marketing Services
and from the InmarsatTMsatellite the elements interfacing with the the MSC and SGSN elements.
antenna is 400MHz to 3GHz and Upgrade Services
• Diplexer/Low Noise Amplifier Airbus Customer Services
due to the close proximity of
(DLNA) located near the Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 22
mobile phones and BTS electro-
satellite antenna for diplexing, Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 41 06
magnetic radiation to crew, Conclusion emeline.baur@airbus.com
filtering and amplifying signals
passengers and aircraft equipment
• A satellite modem that opens a
is low and far below the levels
communication pipe to the
recommended by the World Health InmarsatTMsatellite and
Organization (WHO).
The system’s availability is a long awaited OnAirTM, Airbus’ preferred service provider
modulates the data stream into
solution for existing and future aircraft and for voice and data communication
RF signals (and vice versa). the communication services will become services on-board, is a joint venture
RECEPTION ANTENNA
available in early 2007, firstly for the between Airbus and SITATMand provides
A reception antenna connected to The Network Operations Centre Western-European market. The system is GSM and GPRS services for mobile
the OBCE via coaxial cable above (NOC) is in charge of the dynam- applicable for the whole A320 Family and phones, portable digital assistants (e.g.
the cabin ceiling, is a standard
ic channel assignment to achieve guarantees that passengers' cell phones BlackberryTM) and data (Internet).
the quality of service required will operate in a mode compliant with
dipole to receive signals from pas-
taking into account the traffic aviation and telecommunication regulatory To enable smooth and flexible
sengers phones.
load. requirements during the cruise phase of embodiment of the GSM on-board system
flights. on in-service aircraft with a minimum
ADDITIONAL CONTROLS
aircraft grounding time, Airbus has
The ground
Additional controls provide system The architecture of the GSM on-board developed a stepwise installation of four
control, functions and indication: segment system consists firstly of the airborne Service Bulletins and associated kits
segment, the satellite transport domain, (three for provisions installation and one
• System ON/OFFswitch
and finally the ground segment. The for system installation and activation).
• ‘Voice (Calls) Off’switch The ground segment is based on a
InmarsatTMSwift Broadband satellite
(voice calls disabled, data calls 2.5-generation ground infrastruc-
communication system connects the GSM GSM on-board equipment will be
(SMS/GPRS) enabled) ture, which provides the elements
on-board system with the ground delivered as Buyer Furnished Equipment
• Passengers sign ON/OFF (no for circuit (GSM) and packet
telephony network via the Inmarsat4 to customers by Airbus KID-Systeme.
mobile phone signs). The signs (GPRS/General Packet Radio
satellites.
are switched automatically by Service) switching. This infra-
the system. Cabin crew can structure includes all the standard
39
93
TSAF
38
93
TSAF
IN FLIGHT ENTERTAINMENT - PART II
How in flight entertainment has changed!
Today we have the multiple video From the aircraft in flight music During the flight the wireless
and audio outputs available and spoken presentations were operator had the brilliant idea to
mentioned in the IFE articles in transmitted and also sent to order lunch, which he did at
this FAST Magazine 39 and the ground stations at Hannover, 12:18 am and was promptly ans-
previous FAST Magazine 38. Münster (also connected to wered by the ground station at
Compare this against a big event Dortmund and Elberfeld) and 12:19 am... Lunch ordered!
that took place almost exactly Frankfurt am Main.
eighty years ago. The unique value of the flight was
The transmissions were made up not only the aeronautical and
On a sunny 7 November 1926 at to a distance of 400km and were a radio technological performance,
10:30 am, a three engined Junkers recorded concert presented by but also that every broadcast was
G24 (a large aircraft in those days) Director Gaertner of Ultraphon to a precise time as it had to fit
named ‘Wotan’, manufacturers AG, a speech to listeners by into the continuing programmes
serial number 841, registration Professor Weitz (wearing a cap in of the different ground stations.
D915 and built in 1925, took off the photo above) and a recitation
from Berlin Tempelhof airport in by the actor and lecturer Alfred The flight successfully finished at
Germany. The flight took the air- Beierle who read a chapter from a Frankfurt airport with a speech by
craft from Berlin to Hannover, high altitude flight novel. the airport director, including
Münster and Frankfurt and its an appreciation of the flight
objective was to present for the and the consequences for air
first time to a wide public the traffic safety for which this
technical equipment of the Lufthansa flight set a
Telefunken and Ultraphon AG milestone in development.
companies during a long haul
flight in co-operation Text by courtesy of Lufthansa
with Lufthansa AG.
andthe free
press.
Photo Winzerling
40
ekcenneS
otohP
In flight entertainment
J0841,JU G24
JUNKERS,D-,June 1925,built at Dessau as G23
AB FLYGINDUSTRI,S-AAAR,June 1925 to August1925,named ‘Wotan’
POLN.AERO-LLOYD,P-AWA,August 1925
JLAG,S-AAAR,August1925,modified to G24 at AB Flygindustri,Limhamn
LUFTHANSA,D-915,June1926
DVL,D-915,April 1928
DVS,D-915,December1928 to November 1936,modified to G24 in April 1939,scrapped
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
HUMAN FACTORS SYMPOSIUM SPARES,SUPPLIERS & 15TH PERFORMANCE &
MOSCOW,RUSSIA WARRANTY SYMPOSIUM OPERATIONS CONFERENCE
14-16 JUNE BANGKOK,THAILAND PUERTO-VALLARTA,MEXICO
The 22ndHuman Factors Symposium 12-14 MARCH 2007 23-27 APRIL 2007
took place with the theme of:‘Human This will be the 3rd regional Spares, As for every two years since 1980,
Factors as a core value at Airbus’.The Suppliers and Warranty Symposium. the 15th Performance and Operations
symposium encompassed HF strate- Following the success of the previous Conference will take place in Puerto-
gy,HF training,operations and threat, symposia in Hainan and Athens,this Vallarta. Flight crews, operations
error management in flight operations, regional symposium for the Middle specialists, flight operations engin-
ATC and maintenance. Particular East, Asian and Pacific regions will eers, and performance specialists
importance was given to the Human present progress made from the from all Airbus operators are invited
Factors Toolkit Project, which is previous symposia and provide the to attend and actively participate in
intended to reconcile Human Factors latest news concerning current initia- this event,which will offer numerous
theory with operational guidance. tives in all three areas. opportunities to constructively ex-
The event was sponsored by ICAO The symposium will be an opportuni- change views and information, and
and IAC (Interstate Aviation ty for customers in these regions to increase mutual cooperation and
Committee) of the CIS (Common- exchange and express views con- communication. The conference will
wealth of Independent States). cerning their daily practice and expe- address many operational topics
riences,with the continual aim from covering all Airbus aircraft models in
TRAINING SYMPOSIUM Airbus and suppliers to assist in various sessions such as Looking
SAN FRANCISCO,USA reducing operating costs. Speakers Ahead, CNS/ATM (Communication,
2-5 OCTOBER 2006 from Airbus and suppliers will both be Navigation, Surveillance/Air Traffic
The 8th Training Symposium was an present and available to discuss Management), Flight Economics,
arena not only to present continuing spares,supplier and warranty related e-Documentation, Operations, Perf-
improvements in the training topics. ormance,Electronic Flight Bag…
processes, but also to listen to the On-line sessions and workshops are Invitations for the conference will be
customers views on existing systems planned for an interactive and sent soon.
and thoughts on future solutions.Four dynamic exchange of information at
separate conference streams covered the end of the symposium.
pilot training, cabin crew training,
maintenance training and simulation A320 FAMILY SYMPOSIUM
& training technologies.These com- BANGKOK,THAILAND
07-11 APRIL 2007
plemented an exhibition featuring the
Airbus will propose a basic agenda
latest developments in these fields.
that will be merged with customer Inspired by the background of the
suggestions,concentrating on major
Golden Gate,speakers introduced the
concerns that will likely be based on theme of bridges to link the elements
FAIR (Forum for Airline Issues
of the conference and strongly
Resolution) inputs. It is planned to
emphasized the necessity of building
cover all presentations in the main links between the three essential ele-
session.As usual,adequate facilities
ments of the training model – good
will be available for side meetings. instructors, good programmes and
The formal invitation letters as well good training media as well as the
as the preliminary agenda will be
other critical bridge between the
sent no later than February 2007. instructor and trainee.
The event brought together 81 air-
lines,9 MROs,5 authorities and sup-
pliers from around the world.
93
TSAF
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Thorsten Eckhoff
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3463@
CHINA Customer Support Centres
Training centres
Peter Tiarks
Spares centres / Regional warehouses Senior Director Customer Support
Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM) Tel: +86 10 804 86161 Ext 5040
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63 RCSM location Country RCSM location Country
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates London United Kingdom
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT ADMINISTRATION
Ajaccio France Louisville United States of America
Jean-Philippe Guillon Algiers Algeria Luanda Angola
Director Almaty Kazakhstan Luton United Kingdom
Resident Customer Support Administration Al-Manamah Bahrain Macau S.A.R. China
Amman Jordan Madrid Spain
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02 Amsterdam Netherlands Manchester United Kingdom
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Athens Greece Manila Philippines
Auckland New Zealand Mauritius Mauritius
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Baku Azerbaijan Memphis United States of America
Airbus has its main spares centre in Hamburg, Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei Mexico City Mexico
Bangalore India Miami United States of America and regional warehouses in Frankfurt,
Bangkok Thailand Milan Italy
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Barcelona Spain Minneapolis United States of America
Beijing China Montreal Canada
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Beirut Lebanon Moscow Russia
Berlin Germany Mumbai India
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Brussels Belgium Nanchang China
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Bucuresti Romania Nanjing China
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Buenos Aires Argentina New York United States of America
Cairo Egypt Newcastle Australia
support.airtac@airbus.com Casablanca Morocco Ningbo China
Charlotte United States of America Noumea New Caledonia Spares AOGs in North America should be
Chengdu China Palma de Mallorca Spain
addressed to: Cologne Germany Paris France
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Colombo Sri Lanka Paro Bhutan
Fax: +1 (703) 729 4373 Copenhagen Denmark Phoenix United States of America
Dalian China Pittsburgh United States of America
Spares AOGs outside North America Damascus Syria Prague Czech Republic
Delhi India Quito Ecuador
should be addressed to:
Denver United States of America Rome Italy
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 4001 Detroit United States of America Sana’a Yemen
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 4011 Dhaka Bangladesh San Francisco United States of America
aog.spares@airbus.com Doha Qatar San Salvador El Salvador
Dubai United Arab Emirates Santiago Chile
Spares related HMV issues outside Dublin Ireland Sao Paulo Brazil
Dusseldorf Germany Seoul South Korea
North America should be addressed to:
Fort Lauderdale United States of America Shanghai China
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 4003 Frankfurt Germany Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Fax: +49 (40) 50 76 4013 Guangzhou China Shenyang China
hmv.spares@airbus.com Haikou China Shenzhen China
Hangzhou China Singapore Singapore
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Hanoi Vietnam Sydney Australia
Helsinki Finland Taipei Taiwan
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Hong Kong S.A.R. China Tashkent Uzbekistan
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Indianapolis United States of America Tehran Iran
Istanbul Turkey Tokyo Japan
Airbus Training subsidiaries Izmir Turkey Toulouse France
Miami, USA - Florida Jakarta Indonesia Tulsa United States of America
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Johannesburg South Africa Tunis Tunisia
Karachi Pakistan Varna Bulgaria
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Kita-Kyushu Japan Vienna Austria
Beijing, China Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Washington United States of America
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Kuwait city Kuwait Wuhan China
Lanzhou China Xi'an China
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76
Larnaca Cyprus Zurich Switzerland
Lisbon Portugal 41
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
9
3
T
S
A
F
39
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 6
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
