E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
9
4
T
S
A
F
FAST
49
J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 2
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
JJ UA NL YU A 2R 0Y 0 72 0 1 2
40
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
CustomerServices
Events
Sparepartcommonality
EnsuringA320neoseriescommonality
withtheexistingA320Family
AndrewJamesMASON
Publisher:BrunoPIQUET
GrahamJACKSON
Editor:LucasBLUMENFELD
Pagelayout:Quat’coul Biomimicry
Cover:RadioAltimeters Whenaircraftdesignerslearnfromnature
PicturefromHervéGOUSSE
ExMCompany DenisDARRACQ
AuthorizationforreprintofFASTMagazinearticlesshouldberequested
fromtheeditorattheFASTMagazinee-mailaddressgivenbelow RadioAltimetersystems
CustomerServicesCommunications Correctmaintenancepractices
Tel:+33(0)561934388
Fax:+33(0)561934773 SandraPREVOT
e-mail:fast.magazine@airbus.com
IanGOODWIN
Printer:Amadio
FASTMagazinemaybereadonInternet ELISEConsultingServices
http://www.airbus.com/support/publications
under‘Quickreferences’ ILSadvancedsimulationtechnology
ISSN1293-5476
LaurentEVAIN
©AIRBUSS.A.S.2012.ANEADSCOMPANY Jean-PaulGENOTTIN
Allrightsreserved.Proprietarydocument BrunoGUTIERRES
BytakingdeliveryofthisMagazine(hereafter“Magazine”),youacceptonbehalfof
yourcompanytocomplywiththefollowing.Nootherpropertyrightsaregrantedbythe The‘CleanSky’initiative
deliveryofthisMagazinethantherighttoreadit,forthesolepurposeofinformation.
This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified nor Settingthetone
reproducedwithoutpriorwrittenconsentofAirbusS.A.S.ThisMagazineandthe
materialsitcontainsshallnot,inwholeorinpart,besold,rented,orlicensedtoany AxelKREIN
thirdpartysubjecttopaymentornot.ThisMagazinemaycontainmarket-sensitiveor EricDAUTRIAT
otherinformationthatiscorrectatthetimeofgoingtopress.Thisinformationinvolves
a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation.Airbusassumesnoobligationtoupdateanyinformationcontainedin
Altimeters
thisdocumentorwithrespecttotheinformationdescribedherein.Thestatements
madehereindonotconstituteanofferorformpartofanycontract.Theyarebasedon Frombarometrictoradio
Airbusinformationandareexpressedingoodfaithbutnowarrantyorrepresentation
isgivenastotheiraccuracy.Whenadditionalinformationisrequired,AirbusS.A.Scan
becontactedtoprovidefurtherdetails.AirbusS.A.Sshallassumenoliabilityforany
CustomerServicesWorldwide
damageinconnectionwiththeuseofthisMagazineandthematerialsitcontains,even
ifAirbusS.A.Shasbeenadvisedofthelikelihoodofsuchdamages.Thislicenceis Aroundtheclock...Aroundtheworld
governedbyFrenchlawandexclusivejurisdictionisgiventothecourtsandtribunalsof
Toulouse(France)withoutprejudicetotherightofAirbustobringproceedingsfor
infringementofcopyrightoranyotherintellectualpropertyrightinanyothercourtof
competentjurisdiction.
Airbus,itslogo,A300,A310,A318,A319,A320,A321,A330,
A340,A350,A380andA400Mareregisteredtrademarks.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
94TSAF
49
2
8
15
23
30
36
37
ThisissueofFASTMagazinehasbeenprinted
onpaperproducedwithoutusingchlorine,toreduce
PhotocopyrightAirbus
Photocredits: wasteandhelpconservenaturalresources.
AirbusPhotographicLibrary,ExMCompany,AirbusFrance,GettyImages Everylittlehelps!
1
SPAREPARTCOMMONALITY-ENSURINGA320NEOSERIESCOMMONALITYWITHTHEEXISTINGA320FAMILY
94TSAF
Spare part
commonality
Ensuring A320neo series commonality
with the existing A320 Family
Commonality is one of the key drivers of the The A320neo series is a programme which uses
A320neo development. The A320neo series, innovative new engine and aero-structural
where neo stands for ‘new engine option’, has a technologiestoprovideasignificantimprovement
targetofover95%sparepartscommonalitywith in performance for the A319, A320 and A321
the existing models, enabling the new aircraft to aircraft. Whilst striving to deliver this benefit to
fit seamlessly into existing A320 Family fleets the operators,Airbus is also keen on minimizing
andcustomers’operations.Thiswillhelp airlines the changes to a proven product. Changing only
to achieve significant savings in the areas of what is necessary to integrate the new engines,
Initial Provisioning (IP) investment and keeping the rest of the aircraft in harmony with
maintenance training, compared to an all new the operators’ existing economic and logistical
aircraftseries. models,canensurethefutureoperatorsasimpler,
lowercostserviceentry.
AndrewJamesMASON GrahamJACKSON
ProjectManagerNewProgrammesIP A320neoOperability
AirbusMaterial,LogisticsandSuppliers TechnicalIntegrator
AirbusEngineering
2
94TSAF
SPAREPARTCOMMONALITY-ENSURINGA320NEOSERIESCOMMONALITYWITHTHEEXISTINGA320FAMILY
000000
222222
333333333
AAAAAA
Key drivers of the OVERALLRSPLINVESTMENT
n o t e s
A320neo
The overall RSPL investment was
RSPL(RecommendedSpareParts
development set at the same level for the
List)
A320neoseriesasforthestandard
Airbusprovidescustomerswith
A320 Family aircraft. It was then
Spares’ investment and services materialprovisioningdata
broken down to individual com-
haveahugeimpactonthelifecycle concerningspares’holdingsfor
ponents, in order to ensure that
costofanaircraft.Inrecognitionof agivenfleetbasedoncustomized
both component reliabilities and
this,Airbushassetcleartargetsfor parameters.Thislistgives
contractual agreements with
theA320neo development to drive recommendationsforthe
suppliersdon’tincreasetheoverall
cost factors such as spares’ unscheduledmaintenanceplanning
quantity and cost of parts in the
investment and commonality du- forthefirstyearofoperation.
RSPL.
ring the aircraft definition phase.
This includes the specific
objectives on both commonality
andoverallRSPL*investment.
3
SPAREPARTCOMMONALITY-ENSURINGA320NEOSERIESCOMMONALITYWITHTHEEXISTINGA320FAMILY
94TSAF
COMMONALITYSTUDIES Generation of a
Recommended
The 95% commonality of parts
definedinAirbus’objectivesisnot Spare Parts List
just a marketing figure. An initial
(RSPL)
verification exercise has been
conducted to ensure that it is
measurable, achievable and value To generate RSPLs as a basis of
adding. The following sections comparison,keyassumptionswere
definehowthiswascarriedout. defined relating to the fleet size,
aircraft utilisation, logistics and
Airbus has compared the standard economics. The assumptions are
engine variants, CFM (joint based on experience with all
venture between General Electric Airbusoperatorsandrepresentthe
and SNECMA) and IAE (Inter- averageA320Familymission.
national Aero Engines), with both
‘neo’enginevariants-‘CFMLeap Four RSPLs were generated based
X’ and ‘PW1100G’, as shown in upon the defined assumptions and
figure 2. The operators of both using the same methodology as a
standard engine variants have typical customized airline’s RSPL
expressed an interest in both new forthefollowingconfigurations:
engine options, meaning all fleet
combinationsmustbeconsidered. •A320CFM56-5BVariant,
•A320IAEV2500Variant,
The technical scope of the •A321CFM56-5BVariant,
assessment covers the whole •A321IAEV2500Variant.
airframe, including all systems
impactedbytheintroductionofthe Recommended
new engines, but excluding the
Spare Parts List:
engines and nacelles themselves.
Airframesparepartcommonalitystudy The analysis does not consider Short-listing
consideringA320withdifferentenginevariants
structuralparts.
Figure2 The Recommended Spare Parts
List contains a huge range of
different parts from large assem-
blies such as an APU (Auxiliary
Power Unit) to small ‘nuts and
bolts’. It is critical to filter these
partstogetarepresentativeviewof
the commonality, as hundreds of
small standard hardware part
numbers with very small financial
impactcanfalsifytheresults.
Airbus therefore considered the
number of recommended parts,
multiplied by the respective part
number price, to determine the
spares’financialimpactofeachpart.
Through this exercise, standard
simple items such as filters, light
bulbs,placards,seals,switchesand
sensorswithlittlefinancialimpact,
are removed from the calculation
allowing the exercise to focus on
thevaluableandhighimpactitems.
4
94TSAF
SPAREPARTCOMMONALITY-ENSURINGA320NEOSERIESCOMMONALITYWITHTHEEXISTINGA320FAMILY
Parts’ •1.Fullycommon
•2.Partiallycommon-hardware
commonality
onlycommon*
identification •3.Partiallycommon-
n o t e s
interchangeable(‘neo’to
standard) Softwareupdateisrequired.
The commonality of each part on
•4.Non-common Itallowstheexistinghardware
the short-listed RSPL has been
The suitability of existing A320 tobeembodiedonboththepre
determinedfortheA320neoseries
Familypartsforapplicationonthe andpost‘neo’aircraftseries.
baseline designs for all engine
‘neo’ series is continuously being
variants. The determined commo-
assessed to capitalize on the
nalitieshavebeengradedusingthe
commonalityopportunities.
followingcategories(seefigure3):
Partscommonalityidentification
Figure3
5
SPAREPARTCOMMONALITY-ENSURINGA320NEOSERIESCOMMONALITYWITHTHEEXISTINGA320FAMILY
94TSAF
Commonality SOMEEXAMPLES
feasibility study
A320neo series’commonality can
results be seen on many of the control
computerssuchastheFAC(Flight
Augmentation Computer), ELAC
The percentage of commonality
(Elevator Aileron Computer) and
between each pair of variants is
the DMC (Display Management
visibleinfigure4.
Computer), where the hardware
will remain exactly the same,
b e n e f i t s In order to clearly determine the
requiringonlyasoftwareupdateto
commonality percentage, the
allow full compatibility with the
Theprincipalbenefitsofthe results were classified into two
new engine options. The new
A320neoaircraftseriesare: categories, to reflect the required
software will be such that once
•Reductioninfuelburnof15% customerinvestment:
loaded onto the part, it can be
versusthestandardA320Family
installed on either the ‘neo’ or
aircraft. •Either,newhardware,including:
standard A320 Family aircraft,
•Minimumadditionalspares’ -Partswhicharecompletely
easing parts’ management for a
investmentrequiredduetothe different,
mixedfleet.
synergybetweenA320Family -Partswhicharenewforthe
types. A320neobutcanalsobe
Furthermore, the Integrated Drive
•Minimaladditionalmaintenance retrofittedonthestandard
Generator (IDG) on the A320neo
trainingrequired,owingto A320Familyaircraft.
‘CFM LEAP-X’ is currently
retentionofexistingcomponents.
common with the IDG on the
•Inter-operablewithcurrentA320 •Or,commonhardware,
standard A320 ‘IAE V2500’. An
Familyaircraft. including:
investigationwascarriedoutonthe
•Benchmarkreliability. -Partswhicharecompletelythe
feasibility of adding functionality
same,
to the IDG (see figure 5), which
-Partsforwhichthehardwareis
would have changed the part
thesame(enabledbya
number.Thechangehassincebeen
softwareupgrade).
rejected, retaining commonality of
this exceptionally expensive item
oftheInitialProvisioning(IP).
Commonalityfeasibility
studyresults Commonhardware
Comparison Newhardware(%*)
(%*)
Figure4
TheA320neoseries A320CFM56-5B
95.6 4.4
iscurrentlyunder andA320neoLEAP-X
developmentandthe
detaileddesignisyet
tobefrozen,the
commonality A320CFM56-5B
95.6 4.4
percentageswill andA320neoPW1100G
evolveasthedesign
definitionprogresses.
A320IAEV2500
95.9 4.1
andA320neoLEAP-X
A320IAEV2500
95.5 4.5
andA320neoPW1100G
*PercentagecalculatedoverthecurrentA320parts'baseline
6
7
94TSAF
SPAREPARTCOMMONALITY-ENSURINGA320NEOSERIESCOMMONALITYWITHTHEEXISTINGA320FAMILY
This shows that Airbus can make
informeddecisions,baseduponthe
overall fleet lifecycle costs for the
customer, and obtain the best
solution for the aircraft parts'
commonality.
IDGexample
Figure5
CONTACTDETAILS
AndrewJamesMASON GrahamJACKSON
ProjectManagerNewProgrammesIP A320neoOperability
AirbusMaterial,Logistics TechnicalIntegrator
andSuppliers AirbusEngineering
Tel:+49(0)4050762434 Tel:+33(0)561931640
andrew.j.mason@airbus.com graham.jackson@airbus.com
Conclusion
DuringtheA320neodevelopment,Airbus ThenewenginesfortheA320neoseries,
hassetobjectivesforboththeRSPLcost sharkletsandacontinualaerodynamic
andthesystems’commonality,andhas optimisationallowreductionsinfuelburn,
accuratelyprojectedthespareparts’delta andthereforesignificantsavings.The
betweenthestandardA320Family implementationofthis,whilstretaining
andtheA320neoseries. systemcommonality,isatruedemonstration
Itisclearthat95%commonalityfor ofengineeringexcellencewhichiscritical
airframesystemsisatoughtarget,butthe intoday’scompetitive‘singleaisle’
systematicandpracticalapproachmade market.Alongsidetheaircraftmarket
possiblebyusingsparesprovisioningdata leadingperformance,thesuccessofthe
showshowthiscanbeachieved. A320Familyisalsoarecognitionof
InnovationinAirbusdoesnotstopwith Airbus’constantstrivetoimprovethe
theintroductionofnewtechnologies. productwiththecustomerinmind.
7
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
94TSAF
Biomimicry
When aircraft designers
learn from nature
Asked to design a flying object of about 1kg central pacific region from Alaska to New
capable of a non-stop flight over more than Zealand.Thissmallbutelegantmigratoryseabird
10,000km in less than 10 days, many engineers isindeedcapableofanincredibleefficientflight.
would cautiously answer that these requirements This is just to illustrate that nature is constituted
cannot be met with current technologies. Some of biological solutions and behavioural strategies
othersmightevendemonstratethatitisphysically thatareextremelyefficient,suchasenergysaving
impossible to carry the required energy. But by inflight.
simply raising eyes towards the sky, researchers In this article, you will be convinced that nature
have observed that migrating sea-birds, such as inspires aircraft designers, engineers and manu-
thebar-tailedgodwitisachievingthisoutstanding facturersinmanyways.
performance,andevenbeyond,whencrossingthe
DenisDARRACQ
HeadofFlightPhysics
Research&Technology
AirbusEngineering
8
94TSAF
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
Nature: A model Buttheperformanceobtainedwith
standardtechnologieswillbeginto
for human
saturatesoon.Moreover,itwillnot
creations permittodelivertheradicalstepin
aircraft efficiency that is required
inanotsofarawayfuture,tomeet
Natural selection has been
airtransportobjectivesintermsof
happeningeversincethefirstsigns
fuel consumption and emissions.
of life on Earth, more than three
Natureisasourceofinspirationfor
billion years ago. Charles Darwin
aircraft designers to improve
explainedthatthiskeymechanism
performance.
of evolution is driving the
adaptation of species to their
Biomimicry should not be
environment.Thislongprocesshas
considered as a full scientific
yield to remarkable achievements
discipline, but more as a new
thatarousetheadmirationofthose
approach in which biologists and
who are looking carefully at
engineers are working together,
nature.
firstly by learning to share a
common language.The basic idea
In front of a challenge to human
istounderstandthemechanismsof
intelligence, such as flying, these
thelivingworld,toadaptthemand
natural achievements have often
to apply them on human pro-
been a direct source of imitation
ductions, such as on aircraft, for
for pioneers as described by Otto
Airbus.
Lilienthalin1911in“Birdflightas
the basis of aviation”. Sometimes
with dramatic consequences, as
experienced by first attempts of
humantake-offs. A380inflight
Then the scientific knowledge has
been acquired through a more
rationalapproachoftheproblem.It
has enabled a controlled powered
flight yielding a few decades later
to the emergence of the air
transport industry which carries
now more than two billion
passengers per year across the
world.
Continuous progress of techno-
logiescombinedtotheexploitation
of more and more powerful
computers has permitted to pro-
duce more efficient aircraft. As a
consequence,theconsumptionand
emissions of Airbus aircraft have
been reduced by 70% and noise
productionby75%overthelast40
years
9
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
94TSAF
We cannot copy precisely nature: But species adapted to extreme
An aircraft is not a bird and conditions or born to a strategy of
aeronautical engineers are not longdistancemigrationshavealso
expected to transform themselves developed some clever solutions
intobutterflyhunters.Commercial that also should be looked at by
aircraft are indeed operating in an engineers.
extreme environment at transonic
speeds, high pressures, very low Denominations of recent and
temperatures and are much larger future technologies are a revealing
and heavier than any animal on indicator of this attraction of
Earth. For example, at these engineersforthemodelsofnature.
speeds, air compressibility is In aeronautics, we speak of
playing a major role on aero- “morphing”shape,“natural”lami-
dynamic performance. Therefore narity, “health” monitoring, “self-
the objective is not to simply healing” and “smart” materials,
“mimic” but to understand and to “memory” shape alloys, “genetic”
get inspiration from “techno- algorithms,Airbus“sharklets”,etc.
logical”solutionsandstrategiesof Thepurposeofthisarticleisnotto
thenature. make an exhaustive list of
innovations inspired from nature,
Honeycombed-likestructuresare
usedforaircraftpanelsto saveweight The adaptation from the living but more to give a status and a
world to aircraft production may perspective in the field of flight
require several years of research sciences.
and development. At Airbus, we
are following attentively all these Flight control and
potential sources of innovation for
flight performance
ourfutureproducts.
Butwheretolook?Assumingthata At the end of the 19th. century, the
predatormustbetougherandfaster Wright brothers observed that
than its prey, it seems therefore birds were manoeuvring and reco-
sensible to look first at the veringfromgustdestabilisationby
creatures on top of the food chain, slightly twisting the tip of their
such as flying raptors and sharks. wings.
10
94TSAF
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
They decided to implement a
similarsystemofwingwarpingon
the “Flyer” aircraft in 1903, to
complete what is considered the
first powered controlled flight.
Less than ten years later, as wings
were becoming more rigid, wing-
warpingwasreplacedbymoveable
surfaces located on the wing. The
use of ailerons or spoilers for
rollingisstillthenormtodayonall
modern aircraft. This is likely the
first successful application in
aeronautics of biomimicry, though
theworddidnotexistatthattime.
Globally, an efficient flight
requires producing enough lift
(forceopposedtogravity)togoup
whileloweringdrag(forceopposed These feathers are smoothing the
tospeed)tomoveforwardwiththe mix of airflow near the tip that is
minimumenergy. responsible of creating wing tip
vortices that generate induced
Unfortunately, the production of drag. Similarly, the A380 whose
lift is generating some drag called wing span is limited to 80m to
the lift-induced drag or induced meet airport gate space requi-
drag.Itcanbethesourceofabout rements,isequippedwithwingtip
one third of the total drag of an fences, aiming to improve its
aircraft. Long narrow wings (cha- aerodynamic performance. The
racterizedinaeronauticaltermsby A320Familywillalsosoonbenefit
aspectratio:Wingchordoverspan) from innovative wing tip devices -
generate less induced drag for a the“sharklets”-thatisexpectedto
givenlift.Thankstoahigherwing resultinatleast3.5%reducedfuel
spanofanylivingbird,albatrosses burn (first test flight performed in
(aspect ratio up to 15) are ex- December2011).
ploitingseawindenergytoglidein
any direction effortlessly through Tobesafeandcontrolled,alanding
dynamic soaring. Modern com- must be completed at low speed.
mercial aircraft have pushed the Additionalliftanddragisrequired
limitsofaspectratiouptoabout9 tolowerthespeed.Toachievelow
to10,asbeyondthebenefitsfrom speed performance, the aircraft
drag reduction are offset by other deployflapsandincreasetheangle
penalties, such as manoeuvrability of attack. Hence aircraft and birds
onground. adoptsimilarstrategies:Butmaybe
the bird solution is the more
Verylargewingsareahandicapfor advanced.
bird manoeuvrability (as nicely
describedbyCharlesBaudelairein Moreastonishingly,somebirdsare
"Thealbatross"). deploying alula, a digit covered
with feathers located on the front
Therefore,inordertominimizethe partofthewing,inordertocreate
induced drag for a given wing aslotontheleadingedge.Current
span, nature has been extremely speculation is that this function is
inventive. Some large birds, such enabling birds to delay stall of the
asraptorsandstorks,aredeploying wing(i.e.:Toproducemorelift).It
impressive large feathers on wing is exactly this concept that is used
tips. oncommercialaircraftthroughthe
deploymentofslats.
11
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
94TSAF
Some sea birds, evolving in areas On the contrary, commercial
of strong winds and turbulence aircraft are based on a fixed-wing
have developed a passive control structurethatisprimarilydesigned
capability of the flow - passive for optimum cruise performance.
because it does not require any The rest of the aircraft mission is
energy from the bird. Some achievedthroughdedicatedadd-on
feathers located on the wing of moving devices such as spoilers,
skuabirdsaredeployedbyreverse flaps, slats, rudders and landing
flow, preventing a local separation gears, that are generally retracted
from spreading across the whole during almost all the flight dura-
wing. Large flow separation is tion.
responsible for stall. This passive Even though the deployment and
concept is not applied on aircraft the retraction of aircraft flaps and
butwingsareequippedwithactive slatscanbeseenas“primaryage”
moveablesurfaces(e.g.spoilers)to in morphing evolution, we know
controltheflowonthewing. thatwecannotgobeyondwiththe
currentstructuraltechnologies,due
Biomimicry is very promising in totheimpactoncostandweight.
termsofnewperspectives. Nevertheless, novel technologies
such as “smart” materials are
Morphing raising the prospect to morphing
aircraftconcepts.Amongstvarious
concepts
enabling technologies, shape
memory alloys sustain large
A common characteristic of life is deformations and recover their
theflexibilityofshapesthathuman initial form through temperature
industrial implementation struggle variations, and piezoelectric mate-
to reproduce. The rigidity of a rials produce mechanical stress
robot,anaircraftorasubmarine,is when submitted to a voltage.
strikingcomparedtoaman,abird Therefore,suitablydesignedstruc-
or a fish. Birds are characterized tures made from these materials
by continuously varying the shape can be accurately controlled to
of their wings which guarantee manage seamless deformation of
optimumperformancesforvarious the aircraft weight. This will
purposes: Landing, gliding, revolutionize the aircraft perfor-
flapping,manoeuvringforhunting, mance and will make them
Thefirsttestflightwith"sharklets"
onanA320tookplaceinDecember2011 diving, etc. In aeronautical terms, definitivelylooklikebirds.
theseare“multi-functional”wings.
12
94TSAF
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
Formation flight the shape of grooves: The dermal
denticles. This was going against
the belief of aerodynamicists - the
We have all observed the im-
smootherthesurface,thelowerthe
pressive ‘V’ formation flight of
drag. Detailed investigations have
migratory birds. Scientific studies
indeed demonstrated that these
of pelicans in formation have
groove structures are reducing
concluded that follower birds are
significantly the skin friction,
flyingatalowerheartrateandare
enhancingspeed,andtheenergetic
more often gliding than flapping,
efficiencyofsharks.Flighttestson
compared to a solitary flight.
the Airbus Beluga aircraft with
Actually, follower birds are
shark skin-like surfaces called
exploitingveryopportunelythelift
"riblets",haveconfirmedthatsuch
(i.e.:The energy) produced by the
surfaces are reducing the fuel
outerwingsofleadingbirds.
consumptionandemissions.About
Studies confirmed that such
70% of the aircraft surface could
formationflights(actuallyinverted
be covered by these surfaces. The
‘V’flights)couldbeappliedtoair
drag could be reduced by several
transport with a significant
units of percentage which
reduction of emissions on trans-
represents a significant step of
continental routes, even though
performance for an aircraft.
there would be a time penalty to
Nevertheless, there are several
organize the flight from various
challenges to address such as
airports.
production, operational reliability
(resistance to erosion) and
Surfaces
maintenance.
Beyond all these macroscopic Lotus plants trigger engineers’
solutions captured from the curiosity as they present remar-
observation of bird flights, we kable properties. They are always
know that the marine animals and clean and dry in a dirty and wet
eventhevegetalworld,constitutea environment. Micro structures on
tremendous potential source of the surface of the leaves prevent
innovation for future aircraft. water droplets spreading across.
Particularly, materials and inter- Droplets are slipping over the leaf
faces of species with their clearing the surface from any
environment might inspire revolu- particle of dirt. This self-cleaning
tionary capabilities for aircraft propertyissettoequipcoatingsfor
engineers. Shark skin is not aircraft cabin fittings, or could
smoothatallbutonthecontrary,is even be exploited to prevent ice
constituted of micro structures in accretiononwings.
13
BIOMIMICRY-WHENAIRCRAFTDESIGNERSLEARNFROMNATURE
94TSAF
Thisarticleisdedicatedtooursadlymissed
colleague,FrédéricPICARD,whowasaworld
classconnoisseuroforchids.Duringhistimein
theAirbusInnovationCell,heusedtoconceive
biomimicryasoneoftheexcitinglevers
forinnovation.
FrédéricPICARD
CONTACTDETAILS
DenisDARRACQ
HeadofFlightPhysics
Research&Technology
AirbusEngineering
Tel:+33(0)562117537
denis.darracq@airbus.com
Conclusion
Establishinghistoricallythesourcesof todesigninnovativematerialsand
progressofhumanflightsisnotaneasy advancedinterfaces.Thefurther
task.Andifaircraftlooklikebirds,itis explorationofnatureintheperspectiveof
sometimesimpossibletodistinguish drasticallyreducingairtransportfuelburn
whetheratechnologyisreallyduetothe isrequiringamoredirectcollaboration
observationofbirdsortopurehuman betweenaeronauticalengineersand
abstraction.Actually,itdoesnotreally expertsofalldisciplinesofbiology.
matter:Thelessonisthathuman Theextinctionofanyspeciescausedby
deterministicmethodologyandnatural humanactivities-thatisatragedyinitself
selectionoftenconvergetothesame -representsadefinitivelossofknowledge
solutions. andthereforeapotentiallossofsourceof
Butthebirdflightisonlytheemergedpart progressforhumanityandforthe
oftheicebergthathasbeencapturedso protectionoftheenvironment.Thisisthe
far.Therestofthelivingworld,including reasonwhythepreservationof
plants,isahugetankofpotential biodiversityisapriorityforindustriesthat
innovationsforaeronauticalengineers, willfacetremendoustechnological
particularlytocontrolandexploitthe challengesinthefuture,suchasAirbus.
turbulenceofflows,
14
94TSAF
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
Radio Altimeter systems
Correct maintenance practices
Incorrectmaintenanceofkeyaircraftsystemscan oftenidentifiedthatthereasonforthemalfunction
harm the continued safe operation of the aircraft. ofthesystemwasduetoadegradationthatcould
Onekeysystem,usedduringcriticalflightphases have been prevented by simple maintenance
includinglanding,istheRadioAltimetersystem. practices, such as the cleaning correctly being
Several events have been reported where failures carried out. This article aims to explain why the
of this system have contributed to damage the application of best practice maintenance proce-
aircraft during landing operations. What is little dures on the Radio Altimeter system is key, and
known, is that in many cases these events could detailsthebestpracticestosupportthecontinued
havebeenprevented.Therootcauseinvestigation safeoperationofAirbusaircraft.
SandraPREVOT IanGOODWIN
RadioNav/Com&Data-LinkSystems ProductSafety
CustomerSupportEngineering EnhancementManager
AirbusS.A.S.
15
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
94TSAF
How does a Radio
Altimeter function?
The barometric altitude, used
during cruise phases to determine
anaircraft’saltitude,isbyitsnature
imprecise due to the variation of
the atmospheric pressure. Whilst
this is not a problem in cruise,
during the approach phases, it is
however necessary to have a
greater precision which is not
possible using the barometric
altitude. A Radio Altimeter is
therefore used to provide an
accurateheightabovegroundlevel
whentheaircraftisbetween0and
2,500ft.
The Radio Altimeter functions by
means of radio waves. It transmits
towards the ground a radio wave,
and measures the time taken to
receive the reflected wave in
return. The time between the
AntennaR2 AntennaR1 emission and reception allows the
calculation of the height of the
AntennaT2 AntennaT1
aircraft above ground level. The
RadioAltimetersystemconsistsof
two (three on the A380) inde-
pendent systems, each system
consisting of a transceiver, a
transmission antenna and a
receptionantenna.
InteractionoftheRadioAltimeterwithaircraftsystems(A320usedasexample)
Figure1
Capt FO
PFD PFD
GPWS
FWC1 FWC2
TCAS
Radio Radio
Alt1 Alt2
ELAC1 ELAC2
XMSN Receipt
antenna FMGC 1 FMGC 2 antenna
Receipt XMSN
antenna antenna
Capt:Captain-ELAC:ElevatorAileronComputer-FO:FirstOfficer-FMGC:FlightManagementandGuidanceComputer-FWC:FlightWarningComputer
GPWS:GroundProximityWarningSystem-PFD:PrimaryFlightDisplay-TCAS:TrafficAlertandCollisionAvoidanceSystem-XMSN:Transmission
16
94TSAF
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
The radio height data is shown on
ConsequencesofRadioAltimeterfailures
the Primary Flight Display (PFD)
and also provides feedback to a
Table1
number of aircraft systems, to
advise these on the height of the
Examples
aircraft. In figure 1, you will find Symptoms Observations Correctiveaction
onaircraft
thetypicalinteractionoftheRadio
Altimeter system with aircraft RadioAltimeter
Heavylandingin Correctre-installation
systems. feedbackfrozenat
AUTOLANDanda oftheRA,including
A319 -4ft. Moistureingress
continuousRETARD installationof
observedintheRA
What can go callout. waterproofing.
installation.
wrong?
RAconnectorsnot
installedasperAMM
BothRAsignals
(AircraftMaintenance
observedgoingNCD.
Manual),withlackof
Consequences of Radio Altimeter Similareffects
Tailstrikewithmultiple waterproofingand
failures have been well previouslyobservedon
A320 spuriousECAM incorrectcrimpingon
sameaircraftbuthad
documented, but before reviewing warnings. oneantenna,
clearedatgate,sono
some case studies, let’s review suspectedfollowingan
trouble-shooting
incorrectSB
whatfeedbacktheRadioAltimeter performed.
application.Antennas
(RA) provides. There are two
re-installedcorrectly.
common operating modes of the
RAsystem:
•ThefirstiscodedNormal
Operation(NO):Inthiscase,the
Dirtimpactedthe
RadioAltimetercorrectly RETARDcall transmissionand
transmitsandreceivestheradio UntimelyRETARDcall transmitted receiptofthesignal.
A321
out. at<22ft.RAantenna Correctedbycleaning
waves,andthereforeprovidesan
identifieddirty. theRAantenna
indicationoftheaircraft’sheight
surface.
abovetheground.
•ThesecondisNonComputed
Data(NCD):Aboveacertain
altitude(morethan5,000ftor
duringspecificflightphases thenon-activationoftheflare
(i.e.:Roll>30°)),thesignal law*,leadingtoatailstrikeor
levelreceivedbythereception multipleECAM(Electronic
antennadoesnotallowthe CentralizedAircraftMonitoring)
aircraftheighttobecomputed. messagesonground.
Theheightisthereforenolonger
transmittedandtheRAoutput Does this occur in
becomesNCD.
operation?
If an incorrect value is received,
this can have a negative effect on Damage to the Radio Altimeter i n f o r m a t i o n
theaircraftsystem: systemcanoccurfromeitherwear
Flare mode
•Toolowvalue(erroneous),can andtearcomingfromnormaldaily
Thismodeisautomaticallyengaged
leadtoanearlyactivationof operation of the aircraft, or follo-
whentheRadioAltimeterindicates
flarewhichcouldleadtoan wing an incorrect or incomplete
100ft.aboveground.
increaseintheaircraftangleof application of maintenance prac- At50ft.theaircrafttrimsthenose
attack,whichifnotcorrected, tices, all of which can lead to slightlydown.Duringtheflare,
couldleadtoaircraftstall,hard erroneous values. In such cases, NormalLawprovidesahighangle
ofattackprotectionandbankangle
landingorotheroperational these can lead to spurious cockpit
protection.
effect. indications or incidents which can
Theloadfactorispermittedtobe
•AnincorrectlytransmittedNCD result in the aircraft being out of from2.5Gto-1G,or2Gto0Gwhen
valuewillleadtheaircraftto serviceforalengthyperiod.Three theslatsareextended.
believethatitisincruise typicalcases,withdifferentcauses Thepitchattitudeislimitedfrom
+30to-15°whichisreducedto
altitude.Ifthisoccurswhenthe aredescribedintable1.
25°astheaircraftslowsdown.
aircraftisonthegroundorin
approach,thiscouldleadto
17
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
94TSAF
Maintenance New TSM procedures have been
written to provide recommenda-
aspects
tionstocover:
•ErroneousRadioAltimeter
heightindications,
The operational consequences and
•RadioAltitudesettoNot
what is observed when there is an
ComputedData(NCD).
erroneousRadioAltimeterreading
has been covered in detail in
Airbus’ Safety First edition #11. Prevention is
However, as an essential and
better than cure
importantpieceofequipment,itis
necessary to ensure that the main- with a correct
tenanceactionsandproceduresare
maintenance
correctlyapplied.
application
ACTNOWTOPREVENTLATER
DELAYS
Root cause analysis in the three
In the examples in table 1, whilst casestudiesintable1showthatthe
the root cause is different, a key application of incorrect main-
message to extract is that the tenance or installation procedures
trouble-shooting and root cause could drive to the RA mis-
identification only commenced behaviour so, prevention being
after there was a significant better than cure, the following
operational interruption. There- pointsdetailtheactionstotake.
fore, in the event that a Radio
Altimeterfailureissuspected,then
trouble-shooting in accordance
with theTrouble-Shooting Manual
(TSM)shouldbeperformed.
i n f o r m a t i o n
Radio Altimeter
cleaning requirements
•SIL34-099scheduled
maintenancetask
recommendationforRadio
Altimeterantennas’external
surfacecleaning
•344200-0503-2
fortheA300MPD*
•34-42-02
fortheA300-600STOMP*
•344200-02-1fortheA300-600
andA310MPD
•344200-03-1forthe
A318/A319/A320/A321MPD
•344200-04-1fortheA330
andA340MPD
•344000-00000-01
fortheA380MPD
*MPD:Maintenance
ProgrammeDevelopment
*OMP:Operator
MaintenanceProgramme
18
94TSAF
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
CLEANTOPREVENTERRONEOUS
Accumulationofdirtaround
DATA
RadioAltimeters
The first case is to ensure that the Figure2
period of your maintenance task
associated to the cleaning of the
Radio Altimeter antennas is
correctly suited to the aircraft
operation. The RA antennas,
located on the bottom of the
aircraft behind the main landing
gear (centre landing gear on the
A340), are in the ideal position to
get covered by dirt which
accumulates in normal operation.
Inaddition,theysufferfrombeing
stained by liquids discharged via
the onboard galley drain. These A:BeforeMOD-B:Withadditionalslack-C:Brokenconnectors
materials can form a thick residue
Figure3
on the surface of the antenna and
prevent them from functioning A B C
correctly.
To address this issue and as dirt
accumulation on the RA is a
common failure mode, the first
action of the trouble-shooting for
RA erroneous data is to clean its
antenna. To prevent the aircraft
from getting into a position where
incorrect RA data is being
transmitted due to dirt, a periodic
cleaning is scheduled in the MPD
(MaintenancePlanningDocument) This tempts the mechanic to pull
withanintervalof6months.Inthe justthatlittlebitharder,sometimes
event that dirt accumulation is ontheantenna,togivethatlittlebit
observed to occur at a greater rate moreslack.Thisextraforceonthe
thanthatcoveredbytheMPDtask antenna harness weakens the
(forexampleifoperatingonslushy connectors,andwhilstitmaylook
or contaminated runways, particu- undamaged from the outside,
larly in winter periods, etc.) then several flight cycles after the
cleantheRAantennasatareduced antenna replacement the connec-
interval. The advantages of this is torsmaybreak(seefigure3).This
to prevent the RA data becoming can cause the disturbances of the
NCD or erroneous at landing, and RA signal which may transmit
reducingthechancesofatailstrike erroneous indications or switch to
orhardlanding. NCD, and lead to issues on
approach and landing increasing
MOREFORCEISNOTNECESSARILY theriskofanincident.
THEANSWER To counteract this difficult access
to free the RA cable on the A320
OntheA320Familyaircraft,when Family aircraft, Airbus has
replacing the Radio Altimeter certified a modification which re-
antenna, it is often observed that routes the coaxial cable to provide
there may not be quite enough additional free cable to ease the
available cable length to com- replacementsofRAantennas.This
fortably disconnect/connect the can also be embodied on aircraft
antennatothecable. viaaServiceBulletin.
19
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
Shrinksleeve
Shrinksleeve
Locknut
Additionalsealant
Optional shrink
sleeve(depending
onmodel)
Gelgasket
94TSAF
WATERALWAYSFINDSITSWAYTO The evolution has taken various
THEWRONGPLACES coursesofaction:
•Installation of additional shrink
One of the main causes for sleevesontheconnectorbetween
incorrectRAreadingscomesfrom the RA antennas and cables the
water ingress and the con- introductionofwhicharecovered
tamination of the connectors. by the issuance of appropriate
Water ingress can cause for modifications(seefigure4).
exampleanerroneous-6ftvalueby •TheAMM(Aircraft
direct coupling between the MaintenanceManual)
transmittingandreceivingantenna. installationtaskshavebeen
Also, NCD values may occur due updated,ensuringthatthe
to water causing corrosion of the installationiscorrectly
cables or the antennas themselves. waterproofed.
So what can be done about this?
Wateringresscanbetackledintwo To enhance the waterproof
means: characteristics of the shrink sleeve
•Byensuringthatthecorrect installation, additional sealant at
installationproceduresare the top and bottom of the
followed, installation is added. This ensures
and thatnowaterisabletoingressinto
•Byapplyingthelatest theassembly;eitherfromthetopor
installationrecommendations bottom of the installation (refer to
Additionofshrinktubestoimprove andappropriatewaterproof associated AMM procedures and
waterproofingoftheRAinstallation materials. SIL34-087).Whenintroducingthe
sealant, a key aspect is to make
Figure4 The latest installations have been sure that the sealant has time to
designed to identify and remove dry. Not drying the sealant may
weak points in the water proofing impact the waterproof abilities of
oftheharnesses. the installation. The appropriate
AMMtasksnowreferencethisasa
standardinstallation.
Enhancementofwaterproofing
bytheadditionofsealant
Figure5
20
94TSAF
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
The figures 4 and 5 show the •Introductionofanewgelgasket
building up of the waterproof betweentheRadioAltimeter
installationontheRadioAltimeter antennaandtheaircraftstructure
antenna.Itisimportanttonotethat toimprovewaterproofnessofthe
to get the full protection, all parts installation(detailedinfigures
need to be correctly installed. If 5and7).
one of the parts is not correctly Protectiveboots
installed, then there is likely to be
water ingress into the system with Figure6
itsconsequentialeffects.
Further modifications have been
introducedtopreventwateringress
into the antenna cable and consist
of:
•Addingsealantonthepipe.
•Replacementofthecurrent
polyamideprotectionpipewitha
longermetalonewhichisless
disposedtodeformationand
crackingcausedby
environmentalconditions.
•Additionalwaterproofing
appliedtotheendofthe
protectiveboots,byputting
additionaltapeandclampsat
bothendstomakesurethatthe
entrancesoftheprotectiveboots
aresealedagainsteventual
externalwateringress(referto
figure6).
StepsforadditionalsealantbetweentheRadio
Altimeterantennaandtheaircraftstructure
Figure7
Protectionpipe
Rivet
Sealant PR1436GB
4
Varnish
2
Antenna'O' ring
1 3
Applysealantbetween Applysealantin
1 3
pipeandskin inner gap of pipe/skin
Applysealantaround Applysealantoverthehead
2 4
outerflange oftherivets
21
RADIOALTIMETERSYSTEMS-CORRECTMAINTENANCEPRACTICES
Conclusion
ToensurethattheRadioAltimetersystem installationoftheRadioAltimeter,the
continuestoprovideaccurateandcorrect instructionsarefullyfollowed(including
information,itisnecessarytorecognize, respectingsealantcuretimes).
reportandtrouble-shootsymptomsofthe Byfollowingthepointsidentifiedinthis
RadioAltimetermisbehavioursassoonas articleanddevelopedinthereferenced
theyappear. Airbusdocumentation,theintegrityofthe
Theoperatorsmustadapttheir RadioAltimetersystemcanbeensured
maintenanceregimetotheenvironmental andthecontinuedsafeoperationofthe
conditionsandmakesurethatduringthe aircraftsupported.
94TSAF
The replacement The continued operation of the
RadioAltimeterslocated
aircraftwitholdcablesinstalledis
onthebellyoftheaircraft of cables - getting
not recommended.Therefore, as a
old gracefully precaution, Airbus has addressed
thisissuebyincludingintheMPD
aregulartasktoreplacethecables
Likeallequipment,afteralifetime
and antennas.This is scheduled to
of wear, tear and exposure to the
take place every 144 months (12
environment, the Radio Altimeter
years),duringtheheavyinspection
antennacablesmaybecomedama-
for structural items (refer to SIL
ged, the water proofing may
34-097foradditionalinformation).
becomelessefficientandcorrosion
In addition, it ensures that the
can set in. Water ingress that has
Radio Altimeter cables and
occurred may have affected the
antennas are installed to the most
shielding or the wiring, causing
recentspecification,withthelatest
corrosion and thus perturb the
standard of waterproofness, ensu-
signals. Water present in the RA
ring continued efficiency and
cables may cause cross coupling
accuracy of the Radio Altimeter
anderroneousvaluesoccurring.
system.
d o c u m e n t a t i o n
Installation improvements Service Bulletins:
for the Radio Altimeter: •SBsforimprovementofelectrical
•SIL34-087RadioAltimeterantennas, installationforantennas(Issue2or
protectionagainstwater subsequent):
contamination -A320-92-1030
•SIL34-097AircraftScheduled -A330-92-3044
MaintenanceTaskRecommendation -A340-92-4054
relativetoRadioAltimeterantennas’ -A340-92-5005
installation •SBsforinstallationofgelgaskets:
•FortheA320: -A320-34-1476
-A330-34-3218
AMM34-42-11-400-001
•ForA330/A340: -A340-34-4222
-A340-34-5064
AMM34-42-11-400-801
CONTACTDETAILS
SandraPREVOT IanGOODWIN
RadioNav/Com&Data-Link ProductSafetyEnhancement
Systems Manager
CustomerSupportEngineering AirbusS.A.S.
Tel:+33(0)561188319 Tel:+33(0)561933366
sandra.prevot@airbus.com ian.x.goodwin@airbus.com
22
94TSAF
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
ELISE Consulting Services
ILS advanced simulation
technology
The Instrument Landing System (ILS) is a these, ELISE (Exact Landing Interference
ground-based system at airports. It provides Simulation Environment) enhances the safety of
reliable guidance to aircraft approaching and landing operations, can allow to increase runway
landing at the airport, and is especially useful in capacity and allows the optimisation of airside
reduced visibility conditions. The signal emitted land usage.This article describes the specialised
by the ILS system can be sensitive to multipath consulting service which uses this advanced
disturbances caused by objects close to the simulation software which predicts disturbances
runway, including other aircraft, buildings and with an unequalled level of accuracy and
cranes.Accuratelypredictingdisturbancessuchas reliability.
LaurentEVAIN Jean-PaulGENOTTIN BrunoGUTIERRES
AirportRegulatoryManager HeadofAirsideOperations HeadofAirbusBusiness
AirportOperations AirportOperations Nursery
AirbusS.A.S. AirbusS.A.S. AirbusS.A.S.
23
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
Approachslope
LOC
GP
3°
Signalreceived=
direct+multipath
Direct
signal
LOCantenna Multipath
94TSAF
What is an ILS? ILS multipath
interference
An Instrument Landing System
(ILS)isaground-basedinstrument Any large reflecting objects at an
approachsystem(seefigure1)that airportcanpotentiallycausemulti-
provides precision guidance to an pathinterferencetotheILSsignal.
aircraft approaching and landing These disturbances can make the
onarunway.Itusesacombination ILSsignaldeviatefromitsnominal
of radio signals to guide the position, which would cause a
aircraft during reduced visibility deviation of the aircraft in
landings (Instrument Meteo- approach to the extent that it
rological Conditions – IMC) such becomesunacceptable.
asforlowcloudceilings,fog,rain Aircraft,cranesandlargebuildings
or snowy conditions. The ILS is can produce an ILS multipath
composed of the Localizer (LOC) interference that would exceed the
antenna which provides runway required tolerances as set in
centrelineguidancetoaircraft,and ICAO’s (International Civil Avia-
the Glide Path (GP) antenna as tion Organisation) Annex 10
shown in figure 2, which provides document.
thestandard3°slopeguidance.
Approachslope:IntersectionofLocalizer(LOC)
LocalizerandGlidePathantennas andGlidePath(GP)signals
Figure1 Figure2
MultipathdisturbancesofILSsignalcausedbysurroundingobstacles
Figure3
24
94TSAF
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
However, ILS predicting software a consulting service using
can be used to calculate the advanced simulation software for n o t e s
probable location, magnitude and ILS disturbances called ELISE
EADS:EuropeanAeronautical
duration of ILS disturbances (Exact Landing Interference
DefenseandSpacecompany
caused by objects. A number of Simulation Environment). ENAC
ENAC:EcoleNationale
ILS disturbance prediction tools isarenounedFrenchcivilaviation
del’AviationCivil
currentlyexist.Thesetoolsrelyon universityandcentreofexcellence
the theory of physical optics in ILS antenna expertise. EADS
applied to 2D flat rectangular IW operates the EADS corporate
plates.Theyhavetheadvantageof Research and Technology (R&T)
providing very rapid simulation laboratories and a global network
timesbuttheirvalidityfortreating of technical centres, including
obstacles at grazing incidence is electromagnetism.
questionable. Generally, the more
accurate the ILS predicting tool,
How does ELISE
the more computation power,
memoryandtimeisrequired.This work?
is particularly true for the latest
generation of tools like ELISE
ELISEusesadvancedtechnologies
whichmodelsobjectsin3D.
in:
•Objectmodelling:ELISEis
The ELISE solution
capabletomodeltheobjectsin3
dimensions,whereasthe
Airbus in collaboration with previousgenerationofclassic
EADS* Innovation Works (EADS ILSpredictingtoolsuses2Dflat
IW)andtheENAC*hasdeveloped plates(seefigures3&4).
Methodsofobjectmodeling
Figure4
ELISEmethodin3D
Classicmethodin2D
25
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
•Corecomputing:ELISEuses The advanced levels of accuracy
anexactmethodofresolution and reliability of the ELISE
(MethodofMoments)forthe software have been validated by
radiosignalpropagation more than a hundred ground and
equations(Maxwell’s flight measurements performed at
equations),whereasprevious several airports (see figure 6), in
classicalmethodsarebased coordination with the reference of
onlyonapproximations European Air Navigation Service
(physicaloptics)ofthe Providers -ANSP (DTI in France,
Maxwell’sequations.The DFSinGermany,NATSintheUK
‘MethodofMoments’isthe andSkyGuideinSwitzerland).
mostadvancedandaccurate
methodtomodelthebehaviour These measurement campaigns
ofILSsignals. have demonstrated that ELISE
simulations deliver a better corre-
Based on those two advanced lation with these measurements,
technologies, ELISE consulting which translate into direct ope-
services offer a step change in rational and tangible benefits to
accuracy and reliability on ILS ELISEusers.
signalpredictionscomparedtothe
existing classic ILS predicting
tools.
94TSAF
MethodsofresolutionofILS
propagationequations
Figure5
Simplifiedclassicmethod
BettercorrelationbetweenresultsfromtheactualmeasurementsandELISE
ExactELISEmethod Figure6
Errorbetweenresultsfromclassicmethod
andactualmeasurement
Measurement
classicmethod
ErrorbetweenELISEresultsandactual
measurement
Measurement
ELISE
26
94TSAF
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
ELISE benefits 2.TOINCREASEGROUNDCAPACITY
BYREDUCINGSIGNIFICANTLYTHEILS
PROTECTIONAREAS
ELISE delivers direct operational
andfinancialbenefitstothetarget
The Localizer signal needs to be
customers (i.e.: Air Navigation
protected from multipath inter-
Service Providers, airport opera-
ference. One of the protection
tors and consultants) described in
areas is near any parallel taxiways
thethreefollowingpoints.
to the runway. On the taxiway, the
aircraftisatagrazingangletothe
1.TOIMPROVESAFETYBY
Localizersignal.Atgrazingangles,
REDUCINGTHERISKOF
classical prediction tools provide
UNPREDICTABLEILSFLUCTUATION
far more conservative results than
ELISE.
When an aircraft takes-off it can
generate fluctuations in the
Localizer signal used by any
Safetyissuewhenresultsfromclassicmethodsunder-estimatetherealimpact
aircraft on approach. These ofobstacles
fluctuations can cause lateral
deviations to the aircraft on Figure7
approach or during landing to the
point where the landing aircraft
could veer off the runway surface.
By modelling the aircraft in 2D
only, classic tools cannot predict
those fluctuations, which is a
concern for safety. ELISE
modelling in 3D is accurate and
canpredictallsituationsdelivering
reliablesimulations.
Simulation with classic method
LimitsofICAOCAT 1
Simulation with ELISE showing out of tolerancedisturbance
27
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
94TSAF
Unhelpfullyandasshowninfigure ELISEadvancedtechnologieshave
8, classic tools can even predict permitted the development of
out-of-tolerance disturbances (in elegant “stealth” solutions for
red), which in reality, are well building facades to prevent the
withinthetolerancedefinedbythe building from causing the loss of
ICAOAnnex 10 specifications (in Category III operations at airport
green). By using classic tools, the runways.The solution is based on
ANSP could impose unnecessary diffraction gratings that redirect
operational constraints to the theincidentwavebacktoitssource
airport, even to the point of not rather than the specular direction.
allowing the use of a parallel Diffraction grating has been ex-
taxiway which would adversely tensively studied in the 1980s but
impact the runway’s capacity. has never been applied on
ELISE can significantly help an buildingsfortheILSproblem.The
ANSP take decisions that optimize shape of the diffraction grating is
aircraft operations with sound and optimizedforthespecificposition
reliablepredictions. and orientation of the building
towardtherunway.
3.TOALLOWTHECONSTRUCTIONOF Byusingthisstealthtechnologyon
BUILDINGSCLOSERTOTHERUNWAY buildingslocatedwithinpreviously
forbidden areas, land-constrained
TheICAOEuropeanguidelinesfor airportsarenowinapositiontosig-
managing Building Restricted nificantly increase their land
Areas (BRA) define a volume income(upto100hectarescanbe
where buildings have the potential saved).
to cause unacceptable interference
totheILSsignal.WithintheBRA, Way forward
it is necessary to demonstrate
(using simulation or other means)
that any proposed building for The ELISE software is being
example will not cause distur- introduced in the ICAO Working
bancesinexcessofthepredefined Group in the Navigation Systems’
limits. Panel(NSP)inchargeofupdating
theILSProtectionsAreasinICAO
Annex10.
28
)m(noitisopyawedis.tacS
)m(noitisopyawedis.tacS
ILSprotectionareasaroundrunway
optimizedwithELISE
Figure8
Taxiwayparalleltotherunway
Withclassic
methods
Scat.forwardposition(m) %ofICAOlimits
0 50 100%
Taxiwayparalleltotherunway
WithELISE
Scat.forwardposition(m)
29
94TSAF
ELISECONSULTINGSERVICES-ILSADVANCEDSIMULATIONTECHNOLOGY
After almost one year of business
tests, Airbus’ ELISE Consulting
Services receives very strong EADS IW and ENAC:
positive feedback from several Two core partners for ELISE
airports and Air Navigation
EADS Innovation Works (IW) The Ecole Nationale de
Service Providers. Since last
quarter 2011, several studies have gatherstheEADScorporateResearch l'Aviation Civile (ENAC)
been already done for customers. andTechnology(R&T)laboratoriesthat isaFrenchcivilaviationuniversity.
Year 2012 is expected to see a guaranteethegroup’stechnical Since1January2011,ithasbecome
confirmationoftheinterestsofthe innovationpotentialwithafocuson thebiggestaeronauticaluniversity
huge capabilities of the ELISE thelong-termhorizon.EADSIWhasthe inEurope.Thetrainingsprovidedat
software. missiontoidentifynewvalue-creating theENACinvolveeachyearanaverage
technologiesandtodevelop of2,000studentscomposedof
technologicalskillsandresources. engineers,airtrafficcontrollers,
GillesPERES(electromagnetic electronicengineers,technicians,air
specialist)andAndrewTHAIN(designer transportpilotsandflightdispatchers.
ofstealthbuildings)arepartofthe BertrandSPITZ(ILSinstructor)ispart
electromagneticteamthatdeveloped oftheelectronicdepartmentthat
acompleterangeofsoftwareitems developedaworldwideexpertiseinILS
includingASERISwhichisattheheart antennaknowledge.Hehasdeveloped
ofELISE.Thesesoftwaresupportthe theILSantennamodellingandthe
studiesofelectromagnetic humaninterfacedisplayoftheELISE
compatibility,antennasittings,stealth, software.
andmoregenerally,theeffectsof
theelectromagneticaggressionson
thosesystems.
Supportedby
CONTACTDETAILS Jean-PaulGENOTTIN
HeadofAirsideOperations
LaurentEVAIN AirportOperations
AirportRegulatoryManager AirbusS.A.S.
AirportOperations Tel:+33(0)562118083
AirbusS.A.S. jean-paul.genottin@airbus.com
Tel:+33(0)561931162
laurent.evain@airbus.com BrunoGUTIERRES
HeadofAirbusBusinessNursery
AirbusS.A.S.
Tel:+33(0)562110689
Conclusion
bruno.gutierres@airbus.com
Airbusismuchmorethantheleading TheELISEteamcanprovidedetailed
aircraftmanufacturer.Itdeliversalarge analysisandexpertisetoairportswhich
rangeofservicesnotonlytoairlines,but wanttomaximizetheirgroundcapacity,
alsotoAirNavigationServiceProviders buildnewbuildingsclosertotherunways
andairports.ELISEisonesuchservice, oroperatenewaircraft.Ifyouwouldlike
withadvancedsimulationsoftwarethat moredetails,pleasecontactourspecialists.
predictsILSdisturbanceswithalevelof
accuracyandreliabilityunequalledtoday.
29
THE‘CLEANSKY’INIATIVE-SETTINGTHETONE
94TSAF
The ‘Clean Sky’
initiative
Setting the tone
Clean Sky brings together leading aviation to enable the validation of large-scale systems in
companies and experts to form a truly European realflightdemonstrations.
technologyplatform. Itskeyobjective?Tomature Embedded in the 7th European Framework
the most advanced green technologies in the Programme, the JointTechnology Initiative (JTI)
fields of large commercial transport aircraft, that is Clean Sky offers a key opportunity to
regional aircraft, rotorcraft, aircraft engines and accommodate Airbus Research and Technology
aircraftsystems. priorities, with the view to preparing the next
For Airbus, Clean Sky is one of the most generationofevermoreefficientaircraft.
important elements of aeronautical research in The following article has been published in the
Europe; not only due to its budget of 1.6 billion Air and Space Academy Newsletter (#72) and
euros, but also due to the fact that for the first demonstrates Clean Sky’s active involvement in
time in history, the Clean Sky initiative has pavingthewayforaneco-efficientfuture.
createda7-yearpartnershiponaEuropeanlevel,
AxelKREIN EricDAUTRIAT
SeniorVice-President ExecutiveDirector
ofResearchandTechnology CleanSkyJ.U.
AirbusS.A.S.
30
94TSAF
THE‘CLEANSKY’INITIATIVE-SETTINGTHETONE
An example of Airbus’ role in A “Joint Technological Initiative”,
Clean Sky is the coordination it hinges on a public-private
(jointly done with Saab Aero- partnership associating the Euro-
systems) of the Smart FixedWing pean Commission and just about
aircraft platform, which is one of the entire civil aircraft industry of
the six mentioned integrated Europe.Inthecourseofatenyear
technologydemonstratorsinClean period (2008-2017), it aims to
Sky.HereAirbusispursuingmajor deliver integrated demonstrators
activitiestomatureanallnewlow with a high TRL (Technology
drag “Smart Wing“ concept and ReadinessLevel).
the integration of the most
promising innovative engine con- Thetotalcostoftheprogrammeis
cept - the Contra Rotating Open 1.6 billion euros, making it one of
Rotor (CROR) - to achieve a twoorthreeofthelargestresearch
substantial improvement in fuel programmes ever financed by the
burn and noise reduction for the EuropeanUnioninanyfield.
next generation large transport
aircraft. In addition to direct benefits to
Airbusisalsocontributingtoother Europeancitizens,thereductionof
integrated technology demons- CO emissions and noise also
2
trators, like systems for green providesafederatingobjectiveona
operations, eco-design or the technologicallevel.Effortswillbe
TechnologyEvaluator. madeintheareasofaerodynamics,
mass, propulsion efficiency, flight
Clean Sky’s article pathoptimisation,etc.
published in the
The programme is organized into
Air and Space six Integrated Technology De-
monstrators (ITD), technological
Academy
platforms grouping together cohe-
Newsletter rent research areas and the
interestedplayers(seefigure1).
“Clean Sky”, a designation that
CleanSkyissteeredbypublicandprivatestakeholders
clearly sets the tone. Whether
greenorblue,weknowstraightoff Figure1
thatitwillbeaquestionofskyand
environment. Let's be clear. The
questionhereisnotoneofwaging
war on the (scant) smoke still
escaping from our factory
Governingboard:
chimneys, nor even coping with
European 12industrialleaders+6associates Scientific
thevolcanicashwhichgrabbedthe parliament. +EUcommission andtechnical
headlines in 2010. We are talking Annualdischarge advisoryboard
ofaeronauticaltechnologiesdesig-
ned to reduce the environmental
footprintoffutureaircraftinterms
Nationalstates JointUndertaking
ofCO ,noise,NOxandlifecycle Generalforum
2 representatives executiveteam
effects. group
BornoutoftheACARE(Advisory
Council for Aeronautics Research
Technology
Partners ITD ITD ITD ITD ITD ITD Partners
in Europe) Strategic Research Evaluator
Agenda, Clean Sky is a somewhat
unusualinitiative. ITD: Integrated Technology Demonstrator
31
THE‘CLEANSKY’INITIATIVE-SETTINGTHETONE
94TSAF
Eachoneisdirectedbyatandemof AroundthiscircleofITDleadersis
industrialists. Three of them con- a wider circle of associates: Over
cernaircraftdirectly: 70 other industrialists, research
•SmartFixed-Wingedaircraft,for centres, SMEs (Small & Medium
commercialaircraft(Airbusand Enterprise) and universities, com-
Saab) mittedliketheleadersforthewhole
•GreenRegionalAircraft(Alenia duration of the programme. These
andEADS’Spanisharm) include organisations as diverse as
•GreenRotorcraft(Eurocopter Zodiac, MTU, Onera, Ruag, the
andAgustaWestland) UniversitiesofMilanandCranfield
withthreefurthertransverse ortheRomanianINCAS.
topics:
•SustainableandGreenEngines Leaders, associates and the
(Rolls-RoyceandSafran) European Commission constitute
•SystemsforGreenOperations the members of the Clean Sky
(missionandflightpath Joint Undertaking, or J.U., a
management,energy peculiar legal creature whose
managementwithThalesand uniquemissionistoimplementthe
Liebherr) Technological Initiative of the
•Eco-Design(Dassaultand same name. They are represented
Fraunhofer). byagoverningboard,whichactsas
boththemanagementcommitteeof
The whole is topped by a the programme and the board of
‘Technology Evaluator’, a set of directorsoftheJ.U.Theessenceof
models intended to identify envi- the public-private partnership lies
ronmentalbenefitsonalevelofan in the joint taking of strategic
individual mission, an airport or decisions. Of course, shared
the entire world fleet. This Eva- decision making also implies
luatorisdirectedbyThalesandthe sharedfunding.Fundsareprovided
DLR. halfbytheCommission-fromthe
FP7 (Framework Programme for
research-Eurofundingandindus-
try co-funding) budget - and half
byindustry.(NB:Theterm“indus-
try”isasimplification.Itincludes
research centres and other public
organisations sharing the same
financingterms).
A third circle exists, of crucial
technological and political
importance: The “Partners”. These
are selected by means of regular
(more or less quarterly) calls for
proposals.They must meet precise
technical specifications stemming
from the requirements of the de-
monstrators. Today, after seven
calls for proposals and the related
evaluation processes which are
carried out according to European
Commissionrules,itwouldappear
that the SMEs are doing well,
representingabout40%ofatotalof
almost300identifiedpartners(and
rising): Clean Sky is gradually
involving not only the major
aeronautics players, but also a
significantnumberofnewcomers.
32
94TSAF
THE‘CLEANSKY’INITIATIVE-SETTINGTHETONE
Asregardsgovernance,thehighest •Laminarityisanotherlarge-scale
authority is wielded by the project,andaflight
governing board while the mana- demonstrationisalsoplannedin
gement of the programme is 2015onanA340,withthe
entrusted to the executive director realisationandinstallationofan
of this Joint Undertaking and his 8metre-longwingelement.For
twenty-member team. The J.U. themomentitisaquestionof
issues contracts to members and naturallaminarity,whichmakes
partners and ensures proper exe- manufacturingaspectsallthe
cution of activities; the Director is moreessential,aswellasthe
directly responsible to the Euro- verificationoftherobustnessof
peanParliament. thislaminarity,whichmustnot
belostwiththefirstmosquito
It would be tedious to cite the strike!LikeOpenRotor,
hundredorsokeytechnologiesand laminarityisaverypromising
30 demonstrator projects included technologythatwillberelevant
in the six ITDs. A few examples forfutureaircraftgenerations
willsufficeinordertomakesome thatcouldenterthemarket
generalobservations: aroundthehorizon2025.Clean
•OpenRotor(seefigure2)isthe Skyprovidestheplatformand
mostweighty,totheextentthat timeframe,makingthelarge
CleanSkyfinancestwoparallel requiredtechnologicalstepsat Contra-rotatingOpenRotor
projects:OnebyRolls-Royce, therighttime.
Figure2
theotherbySnecma,bothwith
gearedcounter-rotatingpusher
propulsors.IntermsofCO
2
benefit,OpenRotorisvery
promisingwithapproximately
30%reductioninenginespecific
fuelconsumption,alittleless
onceinstalledbecauseofweight
penaltiesforexample.Problems
ofnoise,vibrationand
certificationhavetoberesolved
ofcourse,butthelatest
informationisencouraging.One
ofthesedemonstratorswillbe
benchtestedin2015,and
subsequentlyflighttestedonan
AirbusA340-600.Thisconcept
isinfactnotentirelynew,having
alreadybeentestedintheUnited
Statesduringthe1980s’surgein
fuelprices,moreshort-livedthan
today.Itdoesthoughbenefit
fromdevelopmentscarriedout
inthepastquarterofacentury.
FIRSTOBSERVATION
Clean Sky includes neither flying
wings, rhomboidal wings, solar
planes nor hydrogen propulsion,
but rather aims for the shorter
term, the very next generation of
aircraft:
NACRE:NewAircraft
ConceptsResearch
33
THE‘CLEANSKY’INITIATIVE-SETTINGTHETONE
94TSAF
SECONDOBSERVATION cockpittechnologieswhichwill
enablerealtimeoptimisationof
CleanSky,bydefinition,isrelated anindividualmission.
to industrial strategies. It aims to
prepare, from the viewpoint of THIRDOBSERVATION
environmentaltechnologies,future
generations of planes and rotor- SESAR is interested in traffic,
craft. This provides an essential Clean Sky with the vehicle. Since
guarantee - disregarding unfore- theonecannotadvancewithoutthe
seen factors which are always other, the two programmes are
possible in research - that public partiallylinked:
expenditure will not be frittered •Researchconcerningcomposite
away on superb but unapplicable materials(andthereforeweight)
technologies. It is also the objec- iscarriedoutwithinthe
tiveofsharedgovernance: frameworkofregionalaircraft.
•Flightpathoptimisationis Someexamplesincludecarbon
anothereffectivemeansto nanotubesinordertoimprove
reducebothCO emissionsand conductivityandshearstrength,
2
noise.InadditiontotheSESAR andmulti-layer,multifunction
(SingleEuropeanSkyATM materials.Admittedly,CleanSky
Research)programme,another isfarfrombeingtheonlyparty
J.U.comprisingthetechnical involvedinresearchactivitieson
sideoftheEuropeanSingleSky composites!Forcommercial
initiative,whichwilloptimizeair aircraft,itiscarriedoutinother
trafficandachieveenvironmental contexts.
benefitsbyavoidingfuelwaste,
CleanSkyisalsolookinginto FOURTHOBSERVATION
Clean Sky is not an island, on the
contrary, it has many partners,
many connections with the classic
FP7 or national programmes;
betterstill,CleanSkyaimstohave
someleverageonthelatter.Letus
note that in France, for example,
the CORAC (COnseil pour la
Recherche Aéronautique Civile)
takes this necessary complemen-
tarityveryseriously:
•Businessaircraft,regionalaircraft
andhelicopterscoordinatepartof
their“allelectric”activitiessince
“allelectric”or“almostall”,is
easiertoachieveinthesesectors
(forreasons,inparticular,of
dissipatedpower)thanfor
commercialaircraft,althoughthe
latterarenotentirelyabsent.
Correspondingarchitectureswill
allbetestedona“CopperBird”
belongingtothe“eco-design”
ITD.
FIFTHOBSERVATION
Clean Sky is a coordinated pro-
gramme, with many interactions
betweenthedifferentITDs,andnot
asimplejuxtapositionofinterests.
34
35
94TSAF
THE‘CLEANSKY’INITIATIVE-SETTINGTHETONE
This, together with the global
natureofthetechnologyevaluator,
demands a “systems” approach
which has not been a feature of
Europeanprogrammesuntilnow.
Clean Sky being an aeronautical
enterprise,onemightsaythatithas
now reached full cruising speed,
after a delayed take-off. Initial
hurdles have been overcome and
the necessary budgetary flexibility
and operational effectiveness
achieved.Later,itwillbeuptothe
market to put these technologies
into operation. The first inter-
mediate achievements are emer-
ging:Partialtestsinflight,produc-
tionofinnovativeparts,etc.
These parts of the puzzle will
begin to be assembled towards
2013, when the largest demon-
stratorsstarttoturnover.
In the meantime, the environ-
mental benefits must be secured.
CleanSkyhasproventobeavery
essential instrument in driving
substantialtechnologyadvancement
forthefutureofaeronautics.
ArticlewrittenbyEricDAUTRIAT
(Copyrightusedbypermission-CleanSky)
CONTACTDETAILS
AxelKREIN EricDAUTRIAT
SeniorVice-President ExecutiveDirector
ofResearchandTechnology CleanSkyJ.U.
AirbusS.A.S. eric.dautriat@cleansky.eu
axel.krein@airbus.com Tel:+3222218152
Conclusion
Tel:+33(0)562110644
CleanSkyhasalreadyprovenitselftobe creatinghighskilledjobs,increasing
anessentialinstrumentindriving transportefficiency,sustainingeconomical
technologyandinnovationforthefutureof prosperityanddrivingenvironmental
aviation.Giventheambitioustargetsset improvementsworldwide.
outinEurope’svisionforaviation, Indeed,asecondgenerationJ.U.will
"Flightpath2050",itisessentialthatwe undoubtedlyberequiredunderthenext
keepourfootfirmlyontheaccelerator. FrameworkProgrammeifweareto
Acommitmenttodeliveringthemost maintainourcurrenttrajectory,whilst
promisingtechnologiesinaviation-the embracingever-moreambitious
fastestgrowingtransportsectorwith objectives,suchasusinglarge-scale
>4,8%/a-attheearliestpossible integrateddemonstratorsfornew
opportunity,–necessarilymeans configurations.
maintainingtechnologicalleadership,
35
ALTIMETERS
94TSAF
From barometric to radio
In 1928, Paul Kollsman invented a barometric altimeter making it possible for pilots
to fly using only their gauges, such as in heavy fog or at night when visibility is limited.
The aviator, James H. Doolittle, became the first pilot to take off, fly and land during
the first all-instrument flight on a Consolidated N-Y-2 biplane, on September 24 1929.
“ W W C w N o h e a a f o l a n t l , t , t c ’ h t S h I t e ’ y i i m r m s o e . h u a e T n o r h o t i l w s e i i t e s i l n l s i q t i t g u w ? s b n i i t t t a i ’ e h t m r s o a y e u m o w a r u e e l a r l t . t r o c s ic h v o e p a b r h l u t t i i h s t m t e o i e c n w t a e e o t r e r s d ld? ”
everinvented.
The history of the altimeter begins with the invention of the mercury barometer, the first
device to measure air pressure. As early as in 1643, Italian physicist Evangelista
Torricelli (a pupil of Galileo), filled a tube with mercury. One end of the tube was closed;
the other open end was turned upside down and inserted in a cup of mercury. Because
the air exerted pressure on the mercury in the cup, about thirty inches of mercury
remained in the tube.
Nowadays, the Radio Altimeter sends out radio waves to a fixed point on the ground
and then determines the altitude by the time it takes the wave to bounce back. Unlike
the barometric altimeter, a Radio Altimeter won't be affected by the weather. However,
a Radio Altimeter is usually only used when the aircraft descends below 2,500ft as
detailed in this FAST magazine (Radio Altimeter systems - page 15), and regular
maintenance practices are recommended.
36
