E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
5
3
T
S
A
F
35
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 4
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened Coming soon
HUMAN FACTORS SYMPOSIUM 13THPERFORMANCE & OPS
New Delhi,India,14-16 September 2004 CONFERENCE
Seoul,Korea,23-25 November 2004 Bangkok,Thailand,4-8 April 2005
Airbus continued the dialogue with its Flight crews, operations and performance
operators at this forum, discussing human specialists are invited to attend and actively
factors aspects with practical and participate in the four-day conference,
operational perspectives. which will offer numerous opportunities
to constructively exchange views and
AIRBUS SPARES & SUPPLIER information, and increase mutual
SERVICES co-operation and communication.
REGIONAL SYMPOSIUM More than 80 subjects will be addressed,
including EFB, flight operations,
Puerto Vallarta,Mexico,25-28October 2004
performance, CNS/ATM, A380 operation
This event focused on the latest
and new documentation. Along with the
developments related to spares support and
different sessions, numerous booths will be
services for all Airbus customers of the
available daily in order to discuss issues and
Americas. The conference followed the
view demonstrations of the newly developed
theme ‘Reducing cost through supply chain
Airbus Flight Operations software.
partnerships’.
AIRBUS WARRANTY CONFERENCE TECHNICAL DATA SUPPORT &
Toulouse,France,30 November-2 December 2004 SERVICES SYMPOSIUM
This was the second event concerning Athens,Greece,25-29 April 2005
Airbus Warranty processes. Customers Airbus will continue the dialogue with
made great contributions to the event and, in operators, concerning the changing face of
addition, a significant number of suppliers technical data.This event will focus on the:
participated and made contributions. • Maturity, functionalities & benefits of
The main Warranty topics were addressed Airbus’digital data application & tools
by alternating presentations with questions • Optimisation of products, data availability
and answers, workshops and face to face and quality
meetings. All these dialogues resulted in • Customer Satisfaction Program (CSIP)
positive exchanges to the benefit of all outcome, measures & results
parties involved. • Current and scheduled
developments/projects.
The preliminary agenda and the formal
7TH TRAINING SYMPOSIUM
invitation will be sent out in December
Bangkok,Thailand, 6-10 December 2004
2004.
This event targeted and ran in parallel,
the three main streams of Airbus Training:
Flight Crew, Maintenance and Cabin Crew. A320 FAMILY TECHNICAL SYMPOSIUM
The symposium is the best forum available, Rhodes,Greece,23-27 May 2005
providing a unique opportunity for briefings The next A320 Family Symposium, will
on all Airbus training programmes, take place in Rhodes, in the Greek islands.
developments and facilities, including It will include actual in-service issues
the A380, as well as various training devices covering the A320 programme and general
used by our customer base. Operator interest subjects concerning, or affecting,
training experts will also present additional the A320 Family. It will be a forum for all
training technologies, methods and customers and operators fleet managers of
solutions. the A320 family to exchange experience.
Publisher:Bruno Piquet
Editor:Kenneth Johnson
Graphic Designer:Agnès Massol-Lacombe
Customer Services Marketing
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
E-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer Escourbiac
FAST may be read on Internet http://www.airbus.com/customer/fast/asp
under Customer Services/Publications
ISSN 1293-5476
This issue of FAST has been printed on paper
produced without using chlorine,to reduce
waste and help conserve natural resources.
Every little helps!
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
35
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Additional Center tanks 2
Upgrading your Airbus fleet for
enhanced operational flexibility
Sonia Bouchardie
APT - Airbus Pilot Transition 6
The new flight crew type rating course
Catherine Neu
Tools and Ground Support Equipment 11
The complete story
André Loubaud
Günter Urban
AirN@v 19
Seamless one-stop access for
aircraft documentation
Anthony Poole
The InternationalAirlines Technical Pool 26
Airbus membership enhances airlines’ access
to spares services
Peter Buchfeld
A380 30
Airports are preparing
for commercial operations
Jean-Paul Genottin
Thirty years ago... 32
the A300B2 entered into service with Air France
Customer Services 33
Around the clock… Around the world
Computer Graphic by I3M
Photographs by Hervé Bérenger, Hervé Goussé and Philippe Masclet
53
TSAF
1
53
TSAF
D E C E M B E R 2 0 0 4
Airbus Customer Services
© AIRBUS S.A.S. 2004. All rights reserved
No other intellectual property rights are granted by the delivery of this Magazine than the right
to read it,for the sole purpose of information.This Magazine and its content shall not be
modified and its images shall not be reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus.
This Magazine and the material it contains shall not,in whole or in part,be sold,rented,
distributed or licensed to any third party.The information contained in this Magazine may vary
over time because of future factors that may affect the accuracy of information herein.Airbus
assumes no obligation to update any information contained in this Magazine.When additional
information is required,Airbus S.A.S.can be contacted to provide further details.Airbus,its
logo and product names are registered trademarks.Airbus S.A.S.shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and of the materials it contains,
even if Airbus S.A.S.has been advised of the likelihood of such damages
1
The extra fuel capacity is normally it to withstand the forces exerted
installed in the forward part of the by the fully laden ACT.
aft cargo hold in containers called
Additional Centre Tanks (ACTs), The system provisions include:
which take the place of normal
cargo containers. For the A320 • fuel transfer and ventilation pipe
Family, ACT holds 2,992 liters of work between the ACT and
fuel, while it holds 7,200liters for centre tanks,
the A310 and A340-300. Most • pressure regulation equipment
models can accommodate up to fitted in the cargo bay,
two ACTs when the cargo hold is • drain lines between the ACT and
configured for either standard bulk associated pipe work to the drain
(A320 Family only) or cargo load- mast,
ing system, while maintaining • cockpit and refuel control panels
room within this area for cargo and and associated wiring for ACT
baggage transportation under spe- operation.
cific loading restrictions. The
A340-600 can hold one ACT in the The pressurisation system ensures
aft section of the forward cargo that the ACT and centre tank are
hold. The A319 Corporate Jet not over pressurised.
(A319CJ) can be fitted with up to
six ACTs, four in the aft cargo hold When the system and structural
and two in the forward cargo hold. provisions are in place, an ACT can
be positioned and restrained by the
The transfer of fuel from ACTs is cargo latches and connected to the
always to the centre tank and is refuel/vent/shroud pipes, drainage
normally achieved by pressurisa- and air pressurisation system as
tion of the ACT using cabin air. In well as the fuel quantity indicating
the event of a failure of the pres- system. An ACT can normally be
surisation system a back-up electri- installed or removed in one eight
cal pump, installed on the rear wall hour shift, including system func-
of the ACT, ensures the fuel trans- tional checks.
fer. Refuel of the ACT is normally
automatic and adds between 5 and High-standard safety requirements
10 minutes to the overall refuel such as impact walls to protect the
time of the aircraft, meaning that ACT from damage or overheating
an A320 Family or A310 aircraft are also set upon installation.
fitted with two ACTs can be refu-
elled in under half an hour and an ACT INSTALLATION
A340 aircraft within 40 minutes.
These refuelling times, taking into The initial installation of an ACT is
account the added ACTs, remain done by Service Bulletin, which
within the turnaround time neces- enables its installation and removal
sary between flights. as required. When the ACT is
removed, the provisions remain on
The option to have one or more the aircraft and a kit is provided to
ACTs installed is broken down into blank and isolate connections. This
two work packages: provides flexibility of ACT usage
and maximum efficiency in its use
• Structural and system provisions by allowing operators to optimise
• ACT installation. ACT installation to their day to day
needs.
STRUCTURAL AND SYSTEM
PROVISIONS ACTs are machined (to minimise
weight) light alloy containers, the
The structural provisions are cov- full width of the cargo bay, and have
ered by a Service Bulletin and con- a flexible bladder tank attached to
sist of reinforcement of the cargo all internal surfaces. The weight of
hold and loading system to enable the tank dry is 400kgs for A320
53
TSAF
ADDITIONALCENTERTANKS
1
2
Upgrading your Airbus fleet
for enhanced operational flexibility
3
To add an extra dimension to the operational flexibility of Airbus
aircraft, Airbus has developed tailored modifications to enable The three main steps
installation of removable additional fuel tank capacity. This additional in installing an ACT.
fuel capacity enables operators to fly longer range, low capacity routes
(long-thin routes), which otherwise would require a larger aircraft.
Originally developed in the 1980s for the A310-300 aircraft, the concept
has since been developed for the A340 and A320 Families of aircraft. To
maximise the extra fuel capacity, modification to the aircraft design
weights and associated modifications may be required or recommended.
Some aircraft may not be candidates for ACT installation depending on
their configuration, and are subject to case by case feasibility study.
Sonia Bouchardie
Technical Project Manager
Upgrade Operations - Systems
Customer Services
3
53
TSAF
ADDITIONALCENTERTANKS
Additional
Center Tanks
2
ADDITIONALCENTERTANKS ADDITIONALCENTERTANKS
Payload range capability A340
Payload
(1,000lb/t)
Family and 615kgs for A310 and with an increased fuel capacity Typical internal reserves
A340-300. The ACT for the A340- giving enhanced operational flexi- 200nm alternate
120
300 is also common to the A310- bility. The ACT gives them the
295 pax + 20.7t (45,600lb) cargo
300. Likewise, the ACT for the ability to extend the range at both
A319 (excluding the A319CJ), can average and low payload condi- 271t MTOW
also be used on the A320 and A321. tions or increase payload signifi- The ACT is an
40
cantly at fuel-limiting ranges, optional feature for
80 7,100nm
The ACT also includes: therefore enabling them to use the the A340.
MTOW (Maximum Take Off 295 passengers + baggage Installing an ACT
• two water drain valves, Weight) increase more efficiently.
could be an
• two fuel quantity indicating Furthermore, the ULD (Unit Load
attractive
Rails for the ACT probes, Device) container shape of the 20 40 ACT (7,200l) operational feature
• a drain system with leak monitor, ACT gives the operator great han-
for high-yield
• over/under pressure protection dling facility, particularly when the
scheduled airlines
devices. aircraft is equipped with a semi-
with average
automatic cargo loading system.
The fuel probes for the A340-300 The cargo loading system allows 0 0 payload
differ from the A310-300 and the quick and easy installation, or 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000 9,000
A321 differs from the A320 and removal, of the ACT without the Range (nm)
A319. So they need to be changed need for any tooling.
when the ACT is switched between
these models. With the current passenger to Payload CFMI engines A320
freighter conversions, operators (1,000lb/t)
The installation of an ACT is cur- may also benefit from the aircraft 20
ACTfuel pipes installations MTOW FAR domestic reserves
rently an option in production for the downtime to embody the ACTs 40
77t/169,750lb 200nm alternate
A310, A319, A320, A321 and A340. option on the A310-300 or A300-
Some Service Bulletins are available 600 to further enhance the aircraft
15 150 passengers + baggage
to retrofit the system and structural operational performance.
provisions (not all aircraft can be 30 3,000nm
retrofitted due to structural con- VIP cabin conversions for all types
2,850nm
straints) and install the ACTs. This of aircraft may also be an opportu-
10
additional tankage available for nity to benefit from ACT installa-
20
Airbus aircraft provides operators tion during the aircraft downtime.
ACT fuel system Center tank vent pipe 5
Center tank 10
schematic Supplementary fuel options:
Interface with
refuel/defuel system 1 ACT (2,992l) / 2 ACTs (5,984l)
Check valve
Pump discharge
Expansion cells 0 0
0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
Center tank rear spar
Range (nm)
ACT Pressure switch
Isolating ACT
valve transfer valve transfer pump Pressure bulkhead
Belly fairing Cabin air intake fuselage Conclusion
Filter Ground test Air shut Filter Ambient press datum
Leak monitor point T1
off valve from LDG gear bay
Fuel/refuel CONTACT DETAILS Taking advantage of the high of these have been retrofitted, or
transfer line
Check valve Pressure degree of commonality offered by will be retrofitted between 2004
(Shrouded) reducing valve Air pressure Sonia Bouchardie
FQI probe Inward relief valve the Airbus Family, ACTs are a and 2007, including 2 VIP aircraft.
Drain pipe Water system for Technical Project Manager
Drain mast for trim line drain fuel transfer Upgrade Operations - Systems flexible solution for operators to
Water Customer Services adapt to demand changes in their The ACT option is available and
V d e r n a t i n line Ch re e s c t k ri c v t a o lv r e Tank inlet valve C va h l e v c e k C va h l e v c e k T F e a l x : : + + 3 3 3 3 ( ( 0 0 ) ) 5 5 6 6 2 1 1 9 1 3 0 4 1 1 4 0 9 6 markets. c M a o n d b ifi e c a s t u io b n je O ct f fe to r u a p R o e n t r r o e f q it uest to
(Shrouded) ( F b l l e a x d i d b e le r t li a n n e k r ) Defuser Vent valve Ground test sonia.bouchardie@airbus.com S op o t m io e n o a p n e d r a re to tr r o s f i h tt a e v d e p c ro h v o i s s e io n n s this A Th ir e b u o s p U tio p n g r h a a d s e b S e e e r n v ic a e d s d . e d into
Vent point T2
and installation of one or two ACTs Airbus Upgrade Services
Burst disk
ACT tank wall on A320 and A321 aircraft. Some Catalogue.
Cargo compartment FQI probe
Cavity drain + high level sensor
+ low level sensor
53
TSAF
4
53
TSAF
5
TRAINING DEFINITION
THE KEY ELEMENTS
APT has been developed by apply-
ing the following principles:
SYSTEMATIC APPROACH TO
INSTRUCTION
Airbus training programmes are
defined to achieve precise training
objectives and to bring flight crew
up to proficiency in the most effi-
cient way, in a learning and time
sense.
The training objectives are deter-
mined through a complete task
analysis. The instructional system
is approached as a whole, where
the training methods, course con-
tents and training equipment are
selected for their ability to best fit
the required final objectives.
LEARNING BY DOING
Practical training is progressively gramme must start from already
introduced very early in the learning acquired knowledge, avoiding cre-
process, with training on Standard ating gaps never filled, or timeless
Operating Procedures (SOP), crew repetition of well known items.
concept and task sharing.
TRAINING CURRICULUM
Computer Based Training (CBT) ORGANISATION
learning sessions start right from
the beginning or the course and are The training is organised around a
combined daily with realistic two-step learning process – a
hands-on sessions on Airbus’s new ground phase enabling learning
state-of-the-art training device – about systems and operational pro-
The Maintenance/Flight Training cedures and a ‘handling’phase using
Device (M/FTD) a Full-Flight Simulator (FFS).
TRAINING TO PROFICIENCY The ground phase is performed
At the end of the training pro- using CBT for system knowledge on
gramme, each crew member shall a laptop provided to each trainee, it
be capable of carrying out their also includes self-paced learning on
tasks safely and efficiently, in the M/FTD.
accordance with the training objec-
tives. Therefore, the training Thanks to the M/FTD, trainees
sequence does not permit a trainee become familiar with operations in
to move up from one phase to the the cockpit from the fifth day of
next until they have acquired the training and benefit from an inter-
skills necessary to complete the active learning of aircraft proce-
objectives of their current phase. dures. Each crew is supported by a
dedicated instructor.
RIGOROUS DEFINITION OF THE
TRAINEE PREREQUISITES In addition, the M/FTD offers the
Good definition of the entry level advantage of being a transportable
of trainees is a success factor for tool, so the ground phase can be
training programme specification. completed at an Airbus training cen-
To be effective, a training pro- tre or at the operator’s home base.
53
TSAF
AAPPTT -- AAIIRRBBUUSS PPIILLOOTT TTRRAANNSSIITTIIOONN TTRRAAIINNIINNGG
APT is based on the following prerequisites
CAPTAIN FIRST OFFICER
• Valid and current Airline • Previously qualified on
Transport Pilot License (ATPL) JAR/FAR/CS 25
• Previous command experience • Aircraft and commercial
operations valid and current CPL
• Fluency in English.Able to (Commercial Pilot License) with
write,read and communicate at instrument rating
an adequately understandable
level in English language • Fluency in English.Able to
write,read and communicate at
• 200 hours experience as airline, an adequately understandable
corporate or military transport level in English language
pilot
• Jet experience
• Jet experience
• Flight time:
• Flight time: . 500 hours as pilot
. 1,500 hours as pilot . 300 hours on JAR/FAR/CS,
. 1,000 hours on JAR/FAR/CS 25 aircraft
25 aircraft . 200 hours experience as
airline,corporate or military
transport pilot
7
53
TSAF
APT - AIRBUS PILOT TRANSITION TRAINING
APT
Airbus Pilot Transition
The new flight crew type rating course
The new Airbus Pilot Transition (APT) course is an
innovative approach to type rating that trains pilots
using the latest interactive learning tools and has been
EFFICIENCY
welcomed by airline crews.
With the intensive use very early in the ground course
of the Maintenance/Flight Training Device (M/FTD),
the first of its kind integrating tutorial mode in a 3D
environment with high fidelity simulation software,
MOBILITY
Airbus again sets training standards for the future
through:
•increased training efficiency, quality of the ground
school phase
•optimised training time
FLEXIBILITY • greater mobilityand flexibilityand
• high versatility and fidelity of the selected new
training devices.
Catherine Neu
Synthetic Flight instructor
Flight Crew Training Policy
Training & Flight Operations Support and Services
6
AAPPTT -- AAIIRRBBUUSS PPIILLOOTT TTRRAANNSSIITTIIOONN TTRRAAIINNIINNGG
USE OF THE M/FTD DURING GROUND PHASE MODE 1
LINKS TO CBT SUMMARY MODULES
When working on system oper-
ations, an appropriate CBT
summary can be displayed on
additional screens.
(1)LOFT PHASE (2) AIRCRAFT BASE TRAINING (3)SKILL TEST PHASE
A LOFT (Line Oriented Flight According to regulation According to the JAR – FCL
Training) session is defined to requirements and airline request, recommendations,the skill test
summarise all the exercises learned two options are provided to the syllabi have been designed in a
throughout the course and to give customer: commercial air transport
the trainee experience in operating . either: Aircraft base training – environment.They consist of:
the aircraft in real time scenarios. 45 minutes per pilot,or . 1st part: a real time sector with
. Zero Flight Time Training (ZFTT) – some specific events
4 hours per crew in the FFS . 2nd part: additional part to deal
with the remaining items to be
performed by the trainee in order
to fully satisfy the JAR – FCL
requirement.
Training is fully
integrated.
No part task training
and progressive
introduction of:
• Flight Management
System (FMS)
functions,
• Systems knowledge
• Standard Operating
Procedures (SOP) in
normal and abnormal
operations
• Crew Resource
Management (CRM)
including task
sharing.
53
TSAF
9
53
TSAF
APT - AIRBUS PILOT TRANSITION TRAINING
COURSE BREAKDOWN IN PERCENTAGE BY TYPE OF TRAINING DEVICES
Ground Phase
Self Welcome/Performance/Cabin/FCOM
18.1% 13.5%
Computer Based Training
24.4%
Instructor led
Briefing & Debriefing
6.3%
10.9%
Maintenance /
Flight Training Device Full Flight
27% Simulator
10 days alternating M/FTD (4h)
24.2%
and CBT self study (3h)
Note: Figures shown for A320 Family.
Similar for A330/A340 Family.
Handling Phase
DETAILED CURRICULUM
CBT in classroom is restricted to
systems presentation. Self paced
CBT for normal and abnormal
operations to prepare the M/FTD
sessions.
GROUND PHASE HANDLING PHASE
Welcome (Optional)
FCOM, LPC*, CRM* Low visibility
Cockpit philosophy, CBT CBT CBT CBT CBT CBT Performance LOFT phase (1) operations
SOPs M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD & system test FFS 2 FFS 4 FFS 6 FFS FFS
11 33 55 77 99 1111 1133 1155 1177 1199 2211 2233 2255
DAYS
22 44 66 88 1100 1122 1144 1166 1188 2200 2222 2244 2266
CBT Performance CBT CBT CBT CBT CBT FFS 1 FFS 3 FFS 5 FFS 7 Skill test phase (3) Aircraft base (2)
M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD M/FTD + CABIN M/FTD FFS training FFS
8
* LPC:Less Paper Cockpit - CRM:Crew Resource Management
APT - AIRBUS PILOT TRANSITION TRAINING
MODE 2
TUTORIAL MODE
The objective of this mode 2 is to
train the procedures:
• sequence of actions
• appropriate call out
• task sharing.
The Tutorial mode included in the
M/FTD provides the instructor
with the appropriate initialisations
when a specific lesson is selected
on the M/FTD instructor panel, i.e.
the M/FTD is automatically ini-
tialised in the correct configura-
tion for the lesson (time saving).
The M/FTD also provides some
visual materials (drawing on
screen).
The tutorial mode is a major con-
tributor to training standardisa-
tion, especially for non-Airbus
instructors.
MODE 3
STANDARD FREE PLAY
SIMULATION
In mode 3 trainees can use the
M/FTD in the same way and with
the same level of system simula-
tion as in a full flight simulator.
Conclusion
The first A320 APT courses were The APT course dramatically
carried out at the Toulouse training enhances the quality and efficiency
centre in mid-September 2004 with of flight crew training and has been
CONTACT DETAILS
crews from two recent Airbus welcomed by the first crews
customers.Typical remarks on the trained.
Catherine Neu course from these customer crews
Synthetic Flight Instructor
were: Today, all Airbus A320 crews
Flight Crew Training Policy
’The M/FTD tutorial sessions are trained in the Toulouse training
Training & Flight Operations
very impressive because we can centre are benefiting from the APT
Support and Services
Tel:+33 5 61 93 28 08 sequence the entire flight and programme. Deployment of A320
Fax:+33 5 62 11 07 40 divide the flight into phases. The APT training in the other Airbus and
catherine.neu@airbus.com instructor can teach us task CAE training centres is scheduled
sharing and the actions to be for early in 2005.
taken in different flight situations’.
’The structure of the course APT training will be implemented in
allowed crews to practice the March 2005 for type rating on the
procedural aspect of their Airbus A330/A340 aircraft and,
learning on the M/FTD.’ later on, on the A380.
53
TSAF
10
53
TSAF
TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY
11
53
TSAF
Tools and
Ground Support
Equipment
The complete story
In the beginning...
On the East African plain 2.5 million years ago, driven by starvation and its desire for
survival, desperate to feed on a whitened skeleton of what had already been the supper of
large predators and hosts of scavengers, a small Australopithecus chose a large flat stone
to crush the larger bones and suck out the nourishing marrow. Little did that creature know,
but apart from guaranteeing survival of its species and propelling it far forward into
evolution, it had invented the ‘Tool’, a tool which allowed it unlimited access to food that no
other species could reach.
Some generations later, its offspring would be designing and manufacturing stone tools of all
shapes and sizes for a wide range of tasks, from cutting and crushing to ploughing and building.
For almost each conceivable application, mankind would design tools to ease or often allow the
task to be done: The Specific Tool was born.
mbe
Massol-Laco
André Loubaud Günter Urban
Director Ground Support Equipment Senior Manager
GSE & Tools and Maintenance Facilities Ground Support Equipment/Tools
Customer Services Spares Support & Services
11
TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY TTTOOOOOOLLSSLS AA ANNNDDD GG GRRROOOUUUNNNDDD SS SUUUPPPPPPOOORRRTTT EE EQQQUUUIIPPIPMMMEEENNNTTT -- -TT TTTHHHEEE CCCOOOMMMPPPLLLEEETTTEEE SSSTTTOOORRRYYY
A set of standard tools
Whether one believes in the Tools, which include test equip-
Theory of Evolution or not, one ment, can again be split into two
can only accept that the design, categories: ‘standard tools and test
manufacture and use of tools is equipment’and ‘specific tools and
probably one of mankind’s most test equipment’.
ancient and also most current
activities. From the dining table to Standard tools and test equipment
the aircraft maintenance hangar, are usually hand tools and instru-
tools are present and required ments such as spanners, sockets,
everywhere, by everyone, all the micrometers, dial gauges, torque
time. It is therefore a surprise that wrenches or ohmmeters. Each one
the world of aircraft maintenance of them can be used for a wide
tools and ground support equip- variety of applications, systems
ment is so little known by so many and aircraft types whatever the
in the industry; a fact that this arti- manufacturer.
cle would like change.
Specific tools and test equipment,
TERMS AND DEFINITIONS are designed with a very specific
task in mind, either a given mainte-
Although the ‘World Airlines nance task (e.g. removal/installa-
Technical Operations Glossary’ tion as per Aircraft Maintenance
(WATOG) definition of Ground Manual (AMM) or a one-time
Support Equipment (GSE) is: modification task (e.g. Service
‘Equipment required on the ground Bulletin (SB) modification). Often, Similarly, modification tools can FOR THE TECHNICAL PART
to support the operation and main- this task is unique to the particular be used for on-aircraft applications
tenance of the aircraft and all its aircraft type or system, for example (Airbus modification SBs) or The ‘providers’to the GSE and tool engineering group are:
airborne equipment’, the industry removal and installation of the workshop applications (e.g. com- • the aircraft systems and structure design office
usually divides Ground Support flaps, each flap of each aircraft type ponent vendor SBs). • the maintainability/supportability department who work with
Equipment into two categories: being unique and requiring a digital mock-ups of the aircraft, tools and users
Toolsand GSE. specifically designed and manufac- ORGANISATION • lessons learned from thirty years of Airbus maintenance tool
tured sling. AND STRUCTURE design and customer feedback.
Example of a tool as shown in
GSEin contrast to the WATOG def- The Airbus tool and GSE world is The ‘users’of GSE and tool engineering group’s work are:
the TEM
inition of GSE - is ground support split between the GSE and tool • the technical data department who distribute the group’s tool
equipment which is not designed engineering group (transnational drawings and Tool Equipment Bulletins (TEBs) and use this data to
for a specific aircraft type, but activity), which covers all the tech- generate the aircraft maintenance documentation and the Tool and
which could be used on a number nical responsibilities, and the GSE Equipment Manual (TEM)
of different aircraft types, such as and tool supply group, which deals • customer and MRO (Maintenance Repair and Overhaul)
wheel change jacks, tripod mainte- with all the commercial responsi- organisations who use information for tool provision purposes and
nance jacks, ground power carts, bilities. to solve daily technical queries
access platforms, or towbars etc. • GSE suppliers who receive GSE and tool engineering group
Such GSE is available in a wide aircraft specifications for GSE design
range of shapes, colours and sizes • Airbus tool manufacturing licensees who receive GSE and tool
from a host of GSE suppliers engineering group daily support for tool manufacturing
worldwide. • The GSE and tool supply group for technical support.
Whether referring to maintenance
specific tools, standard tools and
FOR THE COMMERCIAL PART
to some extent GSE, there are two
main ‘environments’in which they
The ‘providers’to the GSE and tool supply group, are:
can be used:
• Airbus tool manufacturing licensees who receive tool orders from the group and deliver tools to it
• GSE suppliers who deliver GSE to the group
• for ‘on-aircraft maintenance’
• Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs) who deliver tools to the group.
tasks as called up in the AMM
and Trouble Shooting Manual
The ‘users’of the GSE and tool supply group’s work are:
(TSM), or
• the Airbus customer order desk who receive orders and RFQs (Request For Quotation) for tools daily
• for‘workshop’tasks as called up
• customers and MROs purchasing who use the group for tool delivery, re-certification or repair, loan etc.
in Component Maintenance
Manuals (CMMs).
53
TSAF
13
53
TSAF
12
TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY
Technical Department Commercial Department
Engineering Materiel Supply
Maintenance Engineering Operational Units
Design office GSE, tools & facilities GSE & tools supply OEMs
Maintainability
supportability Licensees GSE suppliers
Lessons
learned
Technical Customer & MRO GSE Customer Customer & MRO
data engineering suppliers Order Desk purchasing
Organisation chart TECHNICAL and tools engineering group must
RESPONSIBILITIES ensure that the specifications rela-
tive to the new aircraft type are
Aircraft, like all complex machines, provided to the Airbus technical
require tools to enable them to be data department for inclusion into
designed and built known as design Airbus manuals such as the AMM
and production tools. Aircraft also and Maintenance Facility Planning
require tools to be maintained Manual, and also to GSE vendors,
in operating condition, which are aircraft operators and MROs to
known as maintenance tools. allow them to identify which GSE
they currently hold that could be
Within Airbus, the overall technical used on the new aircraft, or which
responsibility for maintenance new GSE has to be procured - or
tools and the maintenance environ- designed and manufactured in the
ment (facilities) lies in Airbus case of GSE vendors.
Customer Services in Toulouse,
France (see organisation chart). ...DEFINING, DESIGNING AND
PHYSICALLY VALIDATING NEW
GSE and tools engineering group MAINTENANCE TOOLS
department is responsible for: used for the three main applications
which are:
...DEFINING THE SPECIFICATION
OF GSE • maintenance of new aircraft
As stated in ‘terms and definitions’, types or systems
GSE and tools are applicable to var- • aircraft modification SBs
ious aircraft types and are therefore • aircraft repairs as per the
usually readily available on the mar- Aircraft Recovery Manual,
ket. However, before entry into ser- Structural Repair Manual or
vice of a new aircraft type, the GSE repair instructions.
53
TSAF
15
53
TSAF
Formal process
Whatever the origin of the tool
requirement, a formal process from initial requirement to final validation
exists from initial requirement to
Families Main tasks
final validation.
Tools & GSE requirements
Each of the GSE and tool design
Ground handling and servicing offices follow the same stringent
Tools & GSE list
tool design procedures and direc-
Tools for scheduled maintenance
tives which, amongst other
Specifications
things, instruct to keep the tools
Tools for unscheduled maintenance
safe, but as simple as possible for
Design
local manufacture whenever fea-
Tools for repair & aircraft recovery sible.
Prototype manufacturing
Tools for aircraft Mod & SB
Before tool release into service, a
prototype is manufactured and val- Test certificate
Customer queries
idated on aircraft as suitable for the
task it is intended for. This can lead Drawing delivery
to final adjustments or modifica-
tions to the tool design, after which
it is formally validated by releasing
a GCA (GSE Certificate of Accep- ...PROVIDING TECHNICAL
tance) which is the green light for ASSISTANCE FOR FACILITIES
the Airbus technical data depart- MATTERS
ment to incorporate it into the rele- The customer interface department
vant documentation, e.g. AMM also provides technical assistance
and TEM. for all matters related to mainte-
nance facilities. Its recommenda-
...PROVIDING IN-SERVICE tions and assistance possibilities
TECHNICAL SUPPORT FOR TOOL include:
USERS AND MANUFACTURERS
As for aircraft systems and struc- • providing general dimensions
tures, Airbus Customer Services for hangars or workshops, or
Programmes and Technical Support improved layout or modification
& Services provides a customer recommendations for existing
interface department for GSE and buildings
tools, which is the ‘single point of • listing all recommended
contact’ for customers, MROs and equipment and built-in systems
GSE and tool vendors. The cus- for each type of facility along
tomer interface department’s day- with a list of possible vendors
to-day business is to provide tech- • carrying out on-site facilities
nical assistance and support con- reviews and evaluations in the
cerning specific tool design, manu- case of customers receiving new
facturing and utilisation, GSE or aircraft types, customers or
equipment specifications and pos- MROs wishing to develop or
sible vendor contacts. It also pro- expand their maintenance
vides technical tool recommenda- activities or as specialised
tions for provisioning purposes and ‘consultants’in the framework
assistance on maintenance facilities of ‘best industry practices’or
and workshops issues. JAR145 reviews led by other
departments
...PROVIDING CUSTOMISED TOOL • reviewing and suggesting
PROVISIONING improved workflow processes
RECOMMENDATIONS for workshops
This task, which includes also • providing specialised technical
commercial discussion, is conduct- assistance for sales campaigns
ed with the GSE and tools supply to review existing facilities and
department and is described in the to evaluate any changes required
‘combined mission’paragraph. and their financial implications
14
TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY
• in specific cases, to work with • staggered investment based on • warranty of 36 months INITIAL PROVISIONING
specialised architects and civil Airbus experience and • superior quality:
engineers, to propose detailed customer’s planning and Vendor tools are from OEMs It is a recommendation covering
modifications to existing capabilities only and Airbus proprietary tooling requirements based on the
facilities, or entire programme • purchase/loan analysis toolsare from Airbus licensees results of the general pre-
plans and drawings for the • supplier evaluation and sourcing which are quality approved and provisioning meeting held with a
development of new MRO • tool handling advice regularly audited. customer to define the entry-into-
facilities from the hangars and • forwarder recommendation Quality checkis complete on all service of an aircraft. During this
workshops to personnel • warranty administration parts shipped layout and FAA phase a document called ‘W File
canteens or prayer rooms. • tool repair and calibration compliance of the certificates issue 0’, established in accordance
service. are homogeneous. with SPEC 2000, is issued by the
COMMERCIAL GSE and tools supply group.
RESPONSIBILITIES Tools and GSE can be procured COMBINED MISSION
from various sources such as: CUSTOMISED RECOMMENDATIONS
The GSE and tool supply group is The combined mission of the GSE
responsible to: • Airbus for all equipment and tool engineering and supply Working hand-in-hand with Airbus
(purchase and loan) groups is to establish tool provi- Spares Support and Services organ-
• provide tools and GSE for loan • Airbus licensees for Airbus sioning recommendation lists to isation, the GSE and tools engineer-
and sale to all customer airlines proprietary tools (ref Service optimise investments at airlines ing group provides technical tool
and MROs for different Information Letter 00-031 for and MROs by providing them with recommendations for customer pro-
maintenance and repair details) technical and commercial exper- visioning purposes.
purposes • OEMs tise:
• support Airbus customers with • local sub-contractors. Following the established process
special tools and tool kits on • tool commonality study between described below, technical tool rec-
sale and loan basis for The advantages of tools and GSE Airbus aircraft types and others ommendations are priced by the
embodiment of SBs supply from Airbus are the • evaluation of existing tools GSE and tools supply group and
• support Airbus customers, based following: • definition of alternate then discussed in detail with the
on technical and commercial equipment customer.
considerations, in optimising • single point of administration • equivalence for standard hand
their investment in tools and and shipment tools, specific to type tools, The starting point is the customised
GSE and help them reduce their • special package price/tailored hangar and ramp GSE, technical tool recommendation list
maintenance costs. method of payment facilities: access, maintenance which is established by the GSE
• special cost saving solutions for platforms… and tools engineering group based
In addition, the GSE and tools long lead time items, e.g. interim on standard data, such as:
supply group also offers: loan for investment reduction and saving
as well as delivery lead times. • extracted TEM data i.e.
the list of on-aircraft specific
Tool provisioning recommendation maintenance tools applicable to Tool provisioning
is performed in two phases, initial any given aircraft type and
recommendation process
provisioning and customised rec- model
ommendations following a specific • MPD tool list, also known as the Selected tools list
request from a customer. list of tools for scheduled tasks, left with customer
Beijing
Technical tool On-site customer Package price
Hamburg Loan tool stock Tool customer requests
recommendation tool review offer to customer
Washington build up planned
Main loan
Loan tool stock tool stock and service
upgrade in progress
Package offer back
Singapore Extracted Standard list pricing to customer
TEM data
Loan tool stock
build up planned
MPD tool list
Airbus worldwide spares centres
53
TSAF
17
53
TSAF
16
TOOLS AND GROUND SUPPORT EQUIPMENT - THE COMPLETE STORY
Conclusion
CONTACT DETAILS As the reader may now well hand in hand with the GSE and
appreciate, tools, GSE and tools supply group, who ensure
Technical
maintenance facilities are not an physical availability of all possible
André Loubaud
afterthought, but are an integral tools and equipment through
Director GSE/Tools
part of aircraft and component buying, selling and loaning, and
GSE & Tools
and Maintenance Facilities maintenance activities which must also with the technical data
Customer Services be anticipated, both in terms of department who incorporate all the
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 39 52 availability and investment. Within tools into the documentation and
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 28 72 Airbus Customer Services, the distribute the manufacturing
andre.loubaud@airbus.com
GSE and tools engineering group is drawings to customers.
the engineering department whose
Commercial
Günter Urban responsibility it is to ensure that all So, the next time you pick-up a
Senior Manager GSE/Tools the tools and equipment which will tool, be it a hammer in your garage
Spares Support & Services be needed by the customer exist, or a nut-cracker from your dining
Tel:+49 (40) 5076 3203 and also to minimise the table, maybe you will give a little
Fax:+49 (40) 5076 3206
investment required by customers thought to the design process
guenter.urban@airbus.com
by providing customised tool which led to its existence, and
provisioning recommendations and more globally to all similar
tailored facility and equipment processes which began a mere
advice. Obviously, the GSE and 2,500,000 years ago in East Africa.
tools engineering group works 53
TSAF
which is manually built After possible evaluation of the
up by the GSE and tools customer’s existing facilities and
engineering group based tools, a tool selection meeting is
on the latest MPD held between the GSE and tools
revision and the engineering and supply groups and
associated AMM tasks the customer to enable them to
and subtasks decide on the tools they require.
... and customised data The customer personnel met usual-
such as: ly include the responsible engi-
neering and maintenance staff,
• aircraft type and tool/GSE specialists and responsi-
associated options the ble procurement/provisioning staff.
customer has selected
• number of aircraft to be These discussions allow the cus-
maintained and delivery tomer to select the tools required,
Example of a technical schedule based on the GSE and tools engi-
tool recommendation • level of maintenance intended by neering group’s technical explana-
the customer and its possible tions, their own in-service experi-
maintenance providers ence, the tools they already hold, or
• number of main bases and line other local procurement or loan
stations where the customer has possibilities and the GSE and tools
planned maintenance events. supply group’s loan stock contents.
The technical tool recommenda- This leads to a global budgetary
tion is then supplied by the GSE investment figure for the cus-
and tools engineering group to the tomer, based on tool unit prices,
GSE and tools supply groupfor: followed by a package price offer
provided by the GSE and tools
• pricing in accordance with latest supply group.
price data
• lead time of each tool
• loan availability of tool through
Airbus.
18
AirN@v - SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION
53
TSAF
19
53
TSAF
AirN@v
Seamless one-stop access
for maintenance documentation
AirN@v is evolving
In the first AirN@v article in FAST 31 in December 2002, it was explained why and how Airbus
was working on the necessary foundations for today’s digital Technical Data products and services.
In April 2004, ADRES and CAATS, (Airbus Document REtrieval System and Computer Assisted
Aircraft Troubleshooting) were retired, and after a yearlong worldwide deployment fully replaced
by the new consultation tool, AirN@v. Since then, Airbus has been constantly assessing initial
reactions to this powerful new documentation browser and taking note of feedback as we continue
to enhance the capabilities of AirN@v and continue to develop digital services.
A major change to the initial AirN@v version has been the integration of the wiring and web
server options into the AirN@v version 2.1 basic package. This has been done to ensure all
customers and operators will benefit from AirN@v’s full potential. This article will explain how
the inclusion of the wiring manuals, when added to the existing Aircraft Maintenance Manual
(AMM), Illustrated Parts Catalog (IPC) Trouble Shooting Manual (TSM) and trouble shooting tool,
moves AirN@v closer to becoming the total ‘seamless one-stop access’for aircraft maintenance
documentation.
Anthony Poole
Communications & Business Support Manager
Technical Data Support & Services
19
AirN@v - SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION
EXAMPLE OF PREDEFINED need to refer to the appropriate
WIRING MANUAL SEARCH AWM sheet.
In the example that follows, the From the AWM dropdown menu
TSM Fault Isolation Procedure (Refer to figure 4), select ‘Figure
includes the statement ‘Do a check by FIN Connector, Pin’; the
and repair the wiring from the Functional Item Number (FIN)
SDAC 2 to the first terminal block: connector pin search form is dis-
pins AB/8C, 8D of the SDAC 2’ played. Enter the FIN of the
(Refer to ASM 29-31/05 or to fig- SDAC, ‘1WV2’and connector ‘AB’
ure 3). that you obtained from the ASM,
into the search form. Enter OK to
Clicking on the link ASM 29-31/05 open the search results and select
takes you directly to the referenced the correct wiring sheet (in this
ASM schematic 29-31-00 sche- case two schemes are applicable
matic 05. This schematic will give and cover all connections to con-
an overview of the electrical circuit nector AB).
to check. To assist when consulting
the wiring manuals the supplied On the aircraft, using the wiring
magnifier is very useful to help diagram information, a broken
identify components, wiring and contact (open circuit) is identified
references etc. at terminal block 2801VT, Module
45, Contact K (Refer to figure 4).
The TSM fault isolation procedure To make the repair the terminal
mentioned ‘to the first terminal block contact will need replacing
block’, so to identify this, you will and re-crimping to the existing
In the ASM,
use the magnifier
to help identify the
referenced wiring
53
TSAF
AirN@v- SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION
AirN@v (V2.1) What must be remembered is that
ENHANCEMENTS with AirN@v, there are many dif-
(STARTING JANUARY 2005) ferent methods of finding the
required information. The best
Although each ASM
SUITE OF WIRING MANUALS method is the one that works for
schematic will always
NOW INCLUDED AS BASIC the user and they feel comfortable
carry a reference to the
with. This article will focus on the
related AWM
With the revision following predefined dropdown menus that
diagram(s), the quickest
January 2005, the AirN@v have been designed especially for
method to go directly to
Catalogue Page (Refer to figure 1) users.
the AWM sheet, is to
now includes the aircraft wiring
use the AWM
manuals. Full hyper-linking is PREDEFINED WIRING MANUAL
‘predefined form’
ensured between the existing SEARCHES
search function
AMM, TSM, IPC and the addition-
(Refer to figure 4).
al wiring manuals. Experienced AirN@v users will
have realised that the traditional
Some of the basic functions that table of contents is no longer the
demonstrate the advantages of most efficient method of finding
AirN@v when the wiring manuals information. The use of the ‘full
are included, are explained as fol- text’ and ‘predefined form’ search
lows. functions has been proven to be
more efficient and considerably
reduced information search times.
As defined for the AMM, IPC and
TSM, there is included a full set of
‘predefined form’ search menus
designed especially for the Aircraft
Schematics Manual (ASM),
Aircraft Wiring Manual (AWM)
and Aircraft Wiring List (AWL).
These drop-down menus are
accessed from the main top bar
menu (Refer to figure 2). Just
select the appropriate search you
require and the appropriate ‘search
form’will appear.
The following example will show
how to hyperlink between manuals,
it will also focus on the use of
these predefined manual searches.
21
53
TSAF
Figure 1 - AirN@v catalogue page
Figure 3 - TSM linked to Wiring Manuals
ASM,AWM,AWL and ESPM are now included as ‘basic’
Figure 2 - AirN@v predefined search menus
20
AirN@v - SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION
Figure 5 - AirN@v AWM predefined search menus
The ‘Extended
Wire List’gives
the contact
Part Number.
In figure 5
the contact part number
SOME USEFUL AirN@vTIPS directly to the correct page of the for termination A,
IPC detailed figure for the PN. ‘E0170FA2200’is not
• Make full use of the FIN together • When consulting any IPC hyperlinked.
with key words when using the detailed figure, use the ‘SEE Reference to the ESPM
‘predefined form search menus’ AMM’button to go directly to is normally by the
and the ‘full text search’e.g. the correct LRU applicable Electrical
enter ‘Remove 1WV2’. removal/installation procedure Standard and not by
• When entering information into page of the AMM. PN. Therefore it will be
any of the search forms, type the • When consulting wiring necessary to convert the
minimum and select from the diagrams, use the built-in PN to a standard (Refer
resulting list. If the list is too magnifier to help identify to figure 6). Then the
long, simply return to the search diagram details. ‘Standard’is used in
form and refine your search • Use the ESPM alphabetical ‘text search’to find the
criteria. index to navigate to topics e.g. related ESPM
• When entering information into Cable repair (Ref. 20-53-20) or information.
any of the search forms, use of Repair cable (Ref. 20-53-20).
the ‘wild card’or asterisk ‘*’
also eases the input required in IMPROVED HELP FUNCTION
the search forms.
• When consulting any Line On the AirN@v V2.1 DVD
Replaceable Unit (LRU) PowerPoint training presentations
removal/installation procedure, that illustrate usage and include
use the ‘SEE IPC’button to go practical examples are included.
53
TSAF
AirN@v - SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION
An open circuit
is identified on
terminal block
2801VT-Module
45-Contact K
Figure 6 - AirN@v PN
E0170A2200
Part Number
to electrical standard
Standard + Identifier
ESPM search criteria
cable. So next the AWL needs to be this case when the PN is clicked it
consulted for the contact Part links directly to the ESPM
Number (PN) and then the ‘Equivalence Table’which gives the
Electrical Standard Practices NSA PN equivalent to the EN PN
Manual (ESPM) referred to. and also a direct link to the related
ESPM topic. All procedures and
First select the AWL predefined tooling required are included in this
dropdown menu (Refer to figure ESPM topic or related hyperlinks
5), select ‘Figure by Connector are provided (Refer to Figure 7).
Pin..’ and enter the terminal block
FIN, ‘2801VT’ and contact infor- The ESPM will provide the follow-
mation obtained from the AWM, ing information to enable you to
into the AWM ‘FIN connector pin’ carry out the repair:
search form that is displayed.
Enter ‘OK’ to open wiring infor- • contact insertion and extraction
mation contained in the ‘Extended tools
AWL’. • connection procedure
• sealing (if required)
The contact part number EN3155- • crimping procedure and tools
016M2222 (termination B) is a • sleeve information (if required)
European Norm standard (EN). In • wire stripping procedure.
23
53
TSAF
Figure 4 - AirN@v AWM predefined search menus
22
AirN@v- SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION AirN@v- SEAMLESS ONE-STOP ACCESS FOR MAINTENANCE DOCUMENTATION
To further assist airlines, AirN@v Figure 8 - AOLS TR/TEB/AirN@v/TFU download
end-users who have been named as
‘administrators’ (airline adminis-
trator function) will, on request, be
notified by e-mail when a new TR
or TFU becomes available for
download via the AOLS Technical
Download Service. This e-mail
will include a hyperlink to the new
data on the Technical Data
Download Service. Available TFUs
NEW ADDITIONAL MANUALS
By mid 2005, the Standards
Manual (SM) and the Consumable Available TRs.
Underline indicates
Material List (CML) will be inte-
multiple
grated into the basic AirN@v
package.
Both manuals will be added to the Useful references
regular AirN@v DVD as addition-
al database’s and offer customers
OIT* number Date Description
new and useful hyperlinks between
SD 999.0112/04/MA 06 Oct 2004 Supply of an enhanced AirN@v version in Jan/Feb 2005 the IPC and the SM, also between
the AMM and the CML directly SD 999.0096/04/BB 16 Aug 2004 Launch of AirN@v for A310 and A300-600 fleet
from the consumable material ref- SD 999.0052/04/MA 29 Apr 2004 Introduction of new digital technical data download service
erence in an AMM task to the SM SD 999.0162/03/MA 23 Dec 2003 Airbus digital data products and solutions
material specification. *Operator Information Telex
Conclusion
CONTACT DETAILS Replacement of the out-dated use it on the Internet, giving them
CAATS and ADRES by the new the ability to quickly and easily
Anthony Poole technology AirN@v provides a make the latest AirN@v technical
Communications
necessary foundation for today’s data revisions available throughout
& Business Support Manager
Airbus digital Technical Data their organisation. Enhancements Technical Data Support
& Services products and services. The initial to Airbus On Line Services (AOLS)
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 49 21 AirN@v provided maintenance Technical Data Download Service
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 91 86 documentation consultation for the enables customers to download
anthony.poole@airbus.com AMM, IPC and TSM and included a digital Temporary Revisions and
troubleshooting tool. AirN@v user Technical Follow Ups, giving
feedback and experience is quicker and more efficient delivery
assessed continuously by Airbus of these documents. The
and enhancements and additions Standards Manual and
developed and implemented. This Consumable Material List will also
policy of continuous improvement be added to AirN@v in mid 2005,
led to inclusion of the complete further increasing technical data
suite of wiring manuals, making all availability and consultation
the principle Airbus maintenance efficiency.
documentation available in the
AirN@v version to be issued from With these enhancements and
the beginning of 2005. This AirN@v additions AirN@v has now become
version also includes additional a seamless one-stop access for
functionalities, such as the Web technical data consultation,
Server. The Web Server enables acquisition and distribution for
Airbus operators to install AirN@v Airbus operators.
on their own Intranet, Extranet or 53
TSAF
25
53
TSAF
Figure 7 - AirN@v navigation in the ESPM
Contact
connection
procedure
Crimping tool
information
Wire stripping and
insertion/extraction
tools
AirN@vWEB SERVER NOW consultation and download in real-
INCLUDED AS BASIC time. As a result, the TR and TFU
CD-ROMs that are being distrib-
The AirN@v Web Server gives uted, can in future be considered
customers the ability to install as a back up to the AOLS on-line
AirN@v onto their own Intranet, service. The digital TRs and TFUs
Extranet or even to use AirN@v on on the AOLS Technical Data
the Internet. The Web Server will, Download Service page, are pro-
from January 2005, be included in vided within a ZIP package that
the basic AirN@v package, giving includes:
Airbus operators the ability to
quickly and easily make the latest • the TFUs in Rich Text Format
revisions available throughout an or the TRs in PDF to be
airline organisation. anchored within AirN@v
• an anchoring file that correctly
ADDITIONAL AIRBUS ON-LINE attaches the TFU or TR within
SERVICES (AOLS) TECHNICAL the AirN@v application or,
DATA DOWNLOAD SERVICE within other Standard
Generalised Markup Language
Since June 2004, Airbus has pro- based technical documentation
gressively been loading digital consultation systems (using the
Temporary Revisions (TR)s and interface document provided).
Technical Follow Ups (TFU)s
onto the AOLS Technical Data Further details are included in the
Download Service page (Refer to PDF guide available on each
figure 8). These are accessible for AirN@v TFU and TR CD-ROM.
24
THE INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES TECHNICAL POOL (IATP) THE INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES TECHNICAL POOL (IATP)
With more than 300 global dele- IATP Associate members
gates, the organisation is a truly A BRIEF HISTORY (September 2004)
diverse, multi-cultural community.
Each member is encouraged to 1948
Aero Technologies
advance their ideas, suggestions A few airlines started sharing
Airbus
and opinions without any political aircraft materiels, equipment and
Atis Aviation
prejudice in the spirit of a ‘Global manpower resources by gentle-
Aviation Concepts
Village’, thereby promoting good- man’s agreement.
CASL
will among all members. 1950
First Wave
More international airlines
The organisation characterises joined the group and formulas Goodrich
itself by its objectives and mission were introduced to provide HAECO
statement: financial settlement. Honeywell
1967 Lufthansa Technik
IATP Name change to ‘International Mach 2
OBJECTIVES Airlines Technical Pool’. Midnite Express
2004 Nayak Aircraft Services
To maintain a high degree of Associate Members (Original Nordam Group
technical performance in Equipment Manufacturers - Perform Air
aircraft operations. OEMs) allowed to join. Sabena Technics
SR Technics
To maintain a spirit of THE IATP PRINCIPLE OF Sterling Courier
cooperation in the airline POOLING SPARE PARTS, TAECO
community. GROUND SUPPORT
EQUIPMENT/TOOLS AND
To formulate and enforce OTHER SERVICES
simplified procedures that
lower administration costs. HOW DOES IT WORK?
To establish cost sharing Basically the idea is simple: An air-
formulas, which are acceptable line having a large network and
to all members. operating to a number of line sta-
tions is asked by one or more air-
To monitor and ensure there lines operating to a limited number
are no monopolies or of these stations if they could pool
commercial restraints. spares and services at these sta-
tions to cover operations.
IATP
MISSION STATEMENT Alternatively, a number of airlines
get together to pool spares and ser-
The IATP is a convention of airlines vices at stations where they have
sharing technical resources to gener- common operations.
ate economic savings and to achieve
on time dispatch reliability and safe If an airline agrees to put spares
operation at their line stations. and/or services into such a station
it becomes the pool provider air-
The IATP is a non-profit, indepen- line. The other airlines wanting to
dent, non-political global organisa- access those spares and/or services
tion based on a democratic culture are the participating airlines. In
with equal opportunities for all case of need, participating airlines
member airlines and their dele- have the right to access the pooled
gates. spares and/or services. All the
agreements governing the pooled
Throughout its 56-year history, the spares and services are calculated
IATP has contributed significantly according to the IATP Blue Book
to the aviation industry, as we (see following explanation).
know it today, by forging strong
bonds among airlines around the Over time, the IATP members have
world. created formulas to cover pool costs
53
TSAF
IATP member airlines
operate 9,500 aircraft
represent 650 main/line stations
and share 1.2 Billion USD spares
27
53
TSAF
The International
Airlines Technical Pool
Airbus membership
enhances airlines’ access
to spares services
The International Airlines Technical Pool (IATP) is a
convention of airlines consisting of over 100 members
worldwide. In the spirit of cooperation, these
members of the aviation industry gather twice
yearly to discuss the sharing of resources and cost
reduction issues, as well as how to improve
operational efficiency. Under the auspices of
the IATP, members share aircraft recovery
equipment, aircraft parts and tooling, ground
handling equipment and manpower/facilities.
The primary goal of the IATP is to generate
economic savings to participating airlines by minimising
investments otherwise required for the purchase of equipment, and
to position spare parts and other equipment at various stations in support
of aircraft operations.
Peter Buchfeld
VP Operations
Spares Support and Services
26
THE INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES TECHNICAL POOL (IATP) THE INTERNATIONAL AIRLINES TECHNICAL POOL (IATP)
and invoicing. The elements are unit POOLING OF LINE MAINTENANCE • Integrate all these aspects of The current IATP
pool cost, cost of ownership, SERVICES AND ACTIVITIES Airbus participation into Airbus
management committee
number of participants, number of policies to provide better, more
users, number of hours operated, Pooling of line, maintenance efficient and more cost effective
amortisation factor, number of days services and activities includes: service for customers Ted Moos Horst Schrader
borrowed, number of days pool is in Cargolux Airlines Lufthansa
effect, quantity of items pooled and • Sharing manpower and technical OTHER AIRBUS President IATP Board of Directors
many more depending on the pool. facilities CONTRIBUTIONS TO IATP IATP Board of Directors Product Development
• Covering all activities up to and Larry Cook Yoshihiro Yawata
The agreements last for a season including A checks, as well as Further working groups and United Parcel Services All Nippon Airways
(April to October and November to trouble shooting & defect committees exist in which Airbus Vice-President IATP Management
March) and can be renewed or rectification, to prevent AOG is also participating and
IATP Board of Directors Committee Member
changed. (Aircraft On Ground) risks at contributing inputs, as follows:
Financial Affairs Cellaletin Durak
line stations, by using
San Lucktong Turkish Airways
Airbus has requested IATP to open standardised contracts PROJECT GROUPS
Thai Airways IATP Management
the A-pool for A380 and to sepa- • Authorities requirements
IATP Board of Directors Committee Member
rate all other Airbus aircraft from ORGANISATION OF IATP • Introduction A340-500/600
Facilities Marsha Drescher
DC10/MD11. IATP is reviewing CONFERENCES • Introduction A380 (Airbus
Peter Babunek IATP
this request and will come back elected as Co-chair)
Austrian Airlines Business Manager
shortly with a solution. IATP conferences are organised as
Pool Groups IATP Board of Directors
follows: PROJECT COMMITTEES
Corporate Development
• Aircraft recovery
• Pool group training • Supplier services (Airbus
D - Ground handling equipment
• Pool group meetings member)
E - Ground maintenance equipment & aircraft recovery
• Bilateral meetings • Maintenance pooling agreements
F - Technical facilities and services
• Ground equipment, aircraft • On line data development
G – Avionics, common Units & L1011 and tools
recovery • Station restrictions
K – 727,737,707 aircraft units and tools
• Line maintenance (flight line)
L - Line maintenance services?
• All parts pool group meetings THE BLUE BOOK
M – 747 aircraft units and tools
• Exchange meetings (probably members enables ‘real time visibil-
P – DC9, MD-80 & 90 series aircraft units and tools
the most important meeting for The ‘Blue Book’has been prepared ity’ for all of the active pool
Q – DC10/MD11 + all Airbus models units and tools
airlines. Opportunities for direct as an operating manual and func- groups. It is no longer necessary to
S - 757/767 aircraft units and tools
contacts and market place. tional guide for all parties to the submit all the changes via the elec-
T - 777 aircraft units and tools
Delegates can be approached to IATP agreement. It contains all the tronic data processing agency. This
Aircraft recovery
establish other member rules and regulations the IATP has improved the communication
outstation requirements) functions on. It is constantly updat- speed remarkably.
ed subject to IATP members’
AIRBUS BECOMES AN approval. The web page contains all neces-
ASSOCIATE MEMBER OF sary documentation like the Blue
IATP IATP’s new on-line access Book, all pool forms, minutes of
WHY? (https://www.iatpool.com) for meetings, member contacts etc.
Airbus joined IATP in March 2004
for the following main reasons:
Conclusion
• Learn members concerns and
new ideas from the conference
discussions CONTACT DETAILS Due to the rapid development of Airbus participation and
• Present issues concerning Airbus the aviation industry, the IATP is contributions to the IATP
Spares Support and Services and Peter Buchfeld more valuable than ever before. It community will support cooperation
Vice President Operations
solicit feedback from the forum will enhance the services platform among the participating airlines,
Spares Support and Services
of 100 major airlines Tel:+49 (0)40 5076 2202 for airlines while maintaining the MROs and suppliers, plus enable
• Have working sessions with Fax:+49 (0)40 592 398 ideals the organisation was built on. Airbus to learn airlines concerns
airline supply decision makers to peter.buchfeld@airbus.com IATP is the basis to exchange ideas and ideas and adapt Airbus
with organisations around the world policies to provide increasingly
discuss optimum, cost effective
for the benefit of its members, to better spares and services support
solutions, ideas and cooperation
keep up to date with market to customers.
• Be the contact point in the
developments and requirements.
conference for any airlines with
spares and support issues
53
TSAF
29
53
TSAF
28
35
AIRPORTS ARE PREPARING FOR COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS AIRPORTS ARE PREPARING FOR COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS E X T R A C T
DECEMBER 2004
This can mean that the infrastruc- Compatibility Group (AACG), has No other intellectual property rights are granted by
the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read
ture recommended for a certain developed a set of specific opera- it, for the sole purpose of information.This
Magazine and its content shall not be modified
generic group may be in excess of tional recommendations to permit
and its images shall not be reproduced without
what is required to safely accom- A380 operations at existing airports prior written consent of Airbus.This Magazine and
the material it contains shall not,in whole or in
modate a specific aircraft (as is the with a minimum of infrastructure part,be sold,rented,distributed or licensed to any
third party.The information contained in this
case for the A380). change. A major European airport Magazine may vary over time because of future
factors that may affect the accuracy of information
has found that this would reduce the herein.Airbus assumes no obligation to update
AIRCRAFT SPECIFIC projected upgrading costs to full a a n dd y it in io f n o a rm l a in ti f o o n rm c a o t n io ta n i n i e s d r i e n q t u h i i r s e d M , a A g i a r z b i u n s e . S W .A h . e S n .
OPERATIONAL Code F generic design standards by can be contacted to provide further details.Airbus,
its logo and product names are registered
RECOMMENDATIONS 70% and that in total, preparing for trademarks.Airbus S.A.S.shall assume no liability
for any damage in connection with the use of this
the A380 would only represent Magazine and of the materials it contains,even if
Airbus S.A.S.has been advised of the likelihood of
These requirements allow airport 1.4% of the investment planned for such damages
infrastructure to be tailored to a their proposed new runway and ter-
specific type of aircraft based on its minal. These figures are typical of
exact characteristics. They can other airports worldwide.
A380 cater for situations where a New
Large Aircraft (NLA) needs to Airbus has also actively supported
operate to an existing airport that is ICAO, who recently published (in AIRBUS S.A.S.
31707 BLAGNAC CEDEX, FRANCE
not designed to the corresponding June 2004) Circular 305 entitled DECEMBER 2004
PRINTED IN FRANCE
Airports are preparing generic design recommendations. ‘Operation of NLA at Existing A © L L A I R R I B G U H S T S S . R A E .S S . E 2 R 0 V 0 E 4 D
AIRBUS, ITS LOGO, A300, A310, A318,
This process is recognised by Aerodromes’. With this circular, A319, A320, A321, A330, A340, A380,
A400M ARE REGISTERED TRADEMARKS
ICAO and the FAA, who both allow ICAO recognises that generic aero-
AN EADS JOINT COMPANY
for commercial operations a specific aircraft to be evaluated, drome infrastructure recommenda- WITH BAE SYSTEMS
and corresponding tailored infra- tions as defined in Annex 14 are not
structure to be developed provided the sole and unique means for safe-
the application is supported by an ly accommodating specific aircraft
More than 60 airports worldwide are preparing for A380 commercial operations which commence
‘Aeronautical Study’which ensures types at airports. Contained within
in 2nd quarter 2006. With its extra capacity enabling it to make the most efficient use of scarce
the desired level of safety is the Circular are references to a num-
infrastructure resource combined with unparalleled environmental characteristics (it will generate
achieved. This system of approval ber of aeronautical studies that have
half the noise energy of existing large aircraft), airports recognise that the A380 represents the
has been used for many years, for been, or are being, undertaken by
most socially responsible solution to cater for air traffic growth.
example, over 80% of B747 opera- States such as the US, Australia and
tions in the US are from airports others. To assist other States and
The A380 has been designed from the start with existing and future airport infrastructure in mind.
which do not meet the full US aerodrome operators that could
The required level of airport airside infrastructure (taxiway and runway widths and separations
generic design standard for the potentially see NLA operations in
etc) can be specified in two different ways.
type, known as ‘Group V’, and the future, all the studies are being
therefore have been granted uploaded on a step by step basis
GENERIC AIRPORT DESIGN STANDARDS An example is the US Federal Aviation
waivers under this process. A simi- on the ECAC (European Civil
AND RECOMMENDATIONS Agency Advisory Circular (FAA AC)
lar situation exists at several other Aviation Conference) website,
150/5300, which classes aircraft in
large international airports that do http://www.ecac-ceac.org/nla-forum,
These are requirements in which aircraft are Groups I to VI. The A380 falls
not meet the full ICAO Code E managed by leading European Civil
grouped by their wingspan and main landing into the ICAO Code F and FAA
generic design standards. Aviation Authorities.
gear width into generic categories and are applic- Group VI categories. It is
Conclusion
able to the design and construction of a new air- important to note though
A380 SITUATION Following on from Circular 305 and
port, or a new part of an existing airport. Each that the infrastructure
in recognition of the differences
group has a corresponding infrastructure require- dimensions correspond-
Since the mid 1990’s and the days of between airport design and opera- By working closely with ICAO,
ment. At the ICAO (International Civil Aviation ing to each group
the A3XX, Airbus has included and tional needs, ICAO is in the process national aviation authorities
Organisation) level, guidance is found in are based on the
actively sought the comments of reg- of creating an Aerodrome Panel, and airports, Airbus has
Annex14 where the groups are defined by code maximum aircraft
ulatory authorities, airport and air- whose main task is intended to be optimised the design of the
letters A to F. Individual States publish their dimensions
line operators in the design process separating these distinct areas. The A380 for airport compatibility.
own recommendations, usually based on within it.
of the aircraft. These inputs have reference for airport design will Most major airports around
Annex14.
massively optimised the aircraft with remain Annex 14 but requirements the world are preparing for
respect to airport compatibility. for airport operations should be A380 commercial operations
covered by so-called PANS using a specifically tailored
Taking into account the specific (Procedures for Air Navigation solution that, in conjunction
characteristics of the A380, a pan- Services). PANS are expected to with the aircraft design itself,
will minimise disruption and
European group of civil aviation build on the concepts and applica-
cost at airports.
authorities and airport operators, ble measures already available in
known as the A380 Airport Circular 305.
THIRTY YEARS AGO THE A300B2 ENTERED INTO SERVICE WITH AIR FRANCE
53
TSAF
The B2 was a derivative of the A300B, Airbus first
aircraft and the template for the companies successful
widebody fleet, which was launched at the Paris Air Show
in 1969. The first widebody twin-engine jet, the A300B
was capable of carrying 226 passengers in a two-class
lay-out.
Recognising its potential, Air France ordered a stretched
250-seat version, which became the A300B2. After
achieving certification on schedule in March 1974, the B2
went into full-scale production and entered service with
the French flag carrier on May 23 the same year on the
Paris-London route.
The operational capability of the B2 was increased
with the introduction of subsequent versions and this
short-range series was followed by the
medium-range B4 that had an additional
fuel tank in its centre wing box. Production
of the A300B4 ceased in May 1984 when the
A300-600 went into production. The A300-600F remains
a benchmark freighter aircraft today.
32
CUSTOMER SUPPORT AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THAER WTIOCRLLED
Customer Support Centres
Training centres
Spares centres / Regional warehouses
Resident Customer Support Managers (RCSM)
RCSM location Country
Luton United Kingdom
Macau S.A.R. China
Madrid Spain
Manchester United Kingdom
Manila Philippines
Mauritius Mauritius
Melbourne Australia
Memphis United States of America
Mexico City Mexico
Miami United States of America
Milan Italy
Minneapolis United States of America
Montreal Canada
Moscow Russia
Mumbai India
Nanchang China
Nanjing China
Newcastle Australia
New York United States of America
Ningbo China
Noumea New Caledonia
Palma de Mallorca Spain
Paris France
Paro Bhutan
Phoenix United States of America
Pittsburgh United States of America
Qingdao China
Quito Ecuador
Rome Italy
Sana’a Yemen
San Francisco United States of America
San Salvador El Salvador
Santiago Chile
Sao Paulo Brazil
Seoul South Korea
Shanghai China
Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Shenyang China
Shenzhen China
Singapore Singapore
Sydney Australia
Taipei Taiwan
Tashkent Uzbekistan
Tehran Iran
Tokyo Japan
Toronto Canada
Tulsa United States of America
Tunis Tunisia
Vienna Austria
Washington United States of America
Xi'an China
Zurich Switzerland
53
TSAF
Customer support
WORLDWIDE
Jean-Daniel Leroy
VP Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 35 04
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 01
USA/CANADA
Philippe Bordes
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +1 (703) 834 3506
Fax: +1 (703) 834 3464
CHINA
Ron Bollekamp
Senior Director Customer Support
Tel: +86 10 804 86161
Fax: +86 10 804 86162 / 63
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT
ADMINISTRATION RCSM location Country
Jean-Philippe Guillon
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates
Director
Algiers Algeria
Resident Customer Support Administration Amman Jordan
Amsterdam Netherlands
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 31 02
Athens Greece
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 49 64 Auckland New Zealand
Bandar Seri BegawanBrunei
Bangalore India
TECHNICAL,SPARES,TRAINING Bangkok Thailand
Airbus has its main Spares centre in Hamburg, Beirut Lebanon
Brussels Belgium
and regional warehouses in Frankfurt,
Budapest Hungary
Washington D.C., Beijing and Singapore. Buenos Aires Argentina
Cairo Egypt
Casablanca Morocco
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Charlotte United States of America
AOG Technical and Spares calls. Chengdu China
Colombo Sri Lanka
Copenhagen Denmark
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Dalian China
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Damascus Syria
Delhi India
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Denver United States of America
support.airtac@airbus.com Derby United Kingdom
Detroit United States of America
Dhaka Bangladesh
Spares AOGs in North America should be
Doha Qatar
addressed to:
Dubai United Arab Emirates
Tel: +1 (703) 729 9000 Dublin Ireland
Duluth United States of America
Fax:+1 (703) 729 4373
Dusseldorf Germany
Florence Italy
Spares AOGs outside North America should Fort Lauderdale United States of America
be addressed to: Frankfurt Germany
Guangzhou China
Tel: +49 (40) 50 76 3001/3002/3003
Hangzhou China
Fax:+49 (40) 50 76 3011/3012/3013 Hanoi Vietnam
Helsinki Finland
Hong Kong S.A.R. China
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France
Indianapolis United States of America
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Istanbul Turkey
Jakarta Indonesia
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94
Jinan China
Johannesburg South Africa
Airbus Training subsidiaries Karachi Pakistan
Kuala Lumpur Malaysia
Miami, USA - Florida
Kuwait city Kuwait
Tel: +1 (305) 871 36 55 Lanzhou China
Fax:+1 (305) 871 46 49 Larnaca Cyprus
Lisbon Portugal
Beijing, China London United Kingdom
Tel: +86 10 80 48 63 40 Los Angeles United States of America
Louisville United States of America
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 33
www.airbusworld.com
AIRMAN AIRcraft Maintenance ANalysis.
He’s flexible and adaptable. He can’t leap tall of in-service live data checks. He can provide
buildings in a single bound but he can run a fleet analysis of available data and
of aircraft. He’s AIRMAN: A unique software tool access to all relevant information.
designed to optimise the maintenance of your fleet. He can save millions. For more,
Always handy to have around, AIRMAN can reduce contact Airbus Customer Services.
aircraft turnaround time. He can provide millions Airbus. Setting the standards.
