E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
0
5
T
S
A
F
FAST
50
A U G U S T 2 0 1 2
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
05
tsaf
It’s not so often that we celebrate
symbolic milestones of a magazine
dealing with ‘serious’ subjects such
as Flight, Airworthiness, Support
and Technology (FAST). So,
I thought the 50th.edition would be
a good opportunity to do so.
The idea for FAST was conceived
in 1983 by Arno Stein and
Bernard Ziegler - a true Airbus
pioneer, at that time respectively
Vice President and Senior Vice
President of Airbus Customer
Support. The editor was Alasdair
Reynolds, the Technical Director
was Gerard Misraï, and the
graphic design was under Knut
Marsen assisted by Agnès Massol-
Lacombe, who overtook those
responsibilities until her own
retirement in 2009.
The best way to celebrate this
milestone is to thank all of those who
made this longevity possible.
Firstly, thanks to the thousands of
readers around the world who have
encouraged us over the years to
continue publishing technical articles
on our Airbus aircraft. Secondly, a
big part of the merit goes to Airbus
colleagues from all different areas of
activity: Design offices, flight tests,
training, maintenance and engineering
support, spares and logistics, upgrade
services, to name a few, and also
occasionally some airline customers’
staff, who have contributed in writing such
interesting articles.
Finally, I would like to thank the small
team of people on the picture, who directly
contributed to the production of this
magazine: The successive editors standing
from left to right - Denis Dempster, Kenneth
Jonhson and the actual one, Lucas Blumenfeld -
and for the art design, Agnès Massol-Lacombe.
The common point between all the people who
made this FAST adventure possible is the same
and shared passion for aviation.
Let’s continue sharing this passion with you,
through many more editions of FAST magazine!
Bruno PIQUET
FAST magazine publisher
JA UU LGy U2 S0 T0 7 2 0 1 2
40
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Fuel and emissions efficiency
Saving fuel and reducing emissions:
A joint undertaking
Simon WESELBy
Airbus Fuel and Flight Efficiency
Consulting Services
Working together to save on airline costs
Serge GoLoFIER
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Vincent SWIDERSKI
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD
The 4D-trajectory management
Page layout: quatcoul
Cover: FAST 50th edition Flight efficient traffic sequencing based
Cover design: quatcoul
on aircraft predictions
Authorisation for reprint of FAST Magazine articles should be requested
olivier DE-LA-BURGADE
from the editor at the FAST Magazine e-mail address given below
Customer Services Communications Pierre NERI
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73 Sylvain RAyNAUD
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Printer: Amadio Airbus Technical AOG Centre
24 Hours in AIRTAC
FAST Magazine may be read on Internet
http://www.airbus.com/support/publications Ronie GNECCo
under ‘Quick references’
Damien CUSSAC
ISSN 1293-5476
Cabin air quality: The key to a comfortable flight
© AIRBUS S.A.S. 2012. AN EADS CoMPANy
All rights reserved. Proprietary document How to make an aircraft breathe
Dr. Andreas BEZoLD
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter “Magazine”), you accept on behalf
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of Space-Flex
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified
An innovative cabin option for the A320 Family
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus S.A.S. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any Stefanie von LINSToW
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public Passenger comfort
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in Improving air quality in cabins
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation Customer Services
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus S.A.S
Events
can be contacted to provide further details. Airbus S.A.S shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus S.A.S has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence FAST magazine quiz
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
Celebrating the 50th edition
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Customer Services Worldwide
Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330, Around the clock... Around the world
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
05
tsaf
2
7
10
15
22
30
34
35
36
37
This issue of FAST Magazine has been printed
on paper produced without using chlorine, to reduce
Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: waste and help conserve natural resources.
Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Flight Test Photo Lab, EADS Corporate Heritage, ExM Company, Eurocontrol. Every little helps!
1
Fuel and emissions eFFiciency - SAVING FUEL AND REDUCING EMISSIoNS: A JoINT UNDERTAKING
05
tsaf
Fuel and emissions
efficiency
Saving fuel and reducing emissions:
A joint undertaking
Airbus has, is and will offer its customers with environment is becoming a matter of increasing
highly fuel efficient aircraft. Fuel efficiency is concern throughout the world. Today, the most
also function of how the aircraft is operated and effective way to reduce emissions such as
maintained. Airbus supports the airlines seeking the “greenhouse gas” CO is to reduce fuel
2
to optimize their fuel consumption and we also consumption.
support airport and Air Traffic Management In this article, separated in two sections, we will
authorities, helping them to provide ever more demonstrate Airbus’ involvement in helping the
fuel-efficient air transport infrastructures. airlines achieve significant yearly fuel savings,
Furthermore, aviation’s contribution to our while contributing to a greener planet.
Simon WESELBY
Fuel and Emissions
Performance Manager
Airbus S.A.S.
2
05
tsaf
Fuel and emissions eFFiciency - SAVING FUEL AND REDUCING EMISSIoNS: A JoINT UNDERTAKING
An ever increasing
demand
Airbus and alternative
source fuels
Projections indicate that from The challenges associated with Biofuels can be produced from
today’s baseline, commercial the use and certification of renewable plant material or even
aviation’s fuel consumption could jet aviation fuels derived from domestic waste.
double by 2050. Today, for many “non-traditional” sources have
now been overcome. Alternative Biofuels derived from plant matter
operators, fuel represents their
source fuels that conform to the offer the advantage of being close
single largest operating cost
appropriate specification can now to “carbon neutral” as roughly the
(figure 1). Against a background of
be mixed with fuels derived from same amount of Co2 is absorbed
increasing fuel prices, driven by an
traditional sources in a ratio by the plants when growing,
ever increasing worldwide demand of up to 50%, without any specific as is generated when the fuel they
and continued market speculation, operational requirements produce is burnt.
this represents a major risk to the or constraints.
air transport industry development. Airbus only supports
Fuels derived from gas produce sustainable biofuel
reduced particulate matter when development that
The burning of any hydro-carbon
burnt, meaning improved air is not in competition
based fuel, such as jet aviation fuel,
quality at airports. Also, natural gas with food production,
produces a variety of emissions,
reserves exceed those of crude oil water supply
including CO . These emissions
2 and therefore, this technology has or cause
are being increasingly scrutinized a significant economic potential. deforestation
by the scientific community for (read ‘Alternative
their effect on our environment Airbus’ biofuel development strategy fuels’ in FAST
and consequently, by the world’s is now focused on making biofuel magazine 46).
governments as they endeavour to an economically viable alternative
to conventional fuels.
moderate their production.
What has already been done to
address these issues? What is
being done? What will need to be
done in the future?
Operators’ average
operating costs
Figure 1
Typical single aisle aircraft Typical twin aisle aircraft
Crew
Nav. & Landing
Engine Maint.
Airframe Maint.
Fuel
3
Fuel and emissions eFFiciency - SAVING FUEL AND REDUCING EMISSIoNS: A JoINT UNDERTAKING
05
tsaf
Relative 100 %
fuel burn
per seat
80 %
60 %
40 % - 70 %
20 %
0 %
1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000 2010 2020
The fuel efficient twin-aisle sector. The post launch
Lower fuel consumption
success of both of these products
for modern aircraft aircraft
has demonstrated that they are
Figure 2 what the airline industry needs.
The overall fuel consumption of
Airbus has and will continue to offer
commercial passenger jet aircraft
its customers the most fuel efficient
has been drastically reduced
aircraft possible. However, airlines
over the last 50 years (figure 2).
and infrastructure providers also
Airbus has played its part in this
have a role to play in minimizing
reduction through the introduction
fuel consumption.
of innovative technologies in
its highly successful products.
How can an airline
Fly-by-wire and the use of
Airbus “Getting to Grips” composites, initially in secondary save fuel?
series of documents and then in primary structure,
have many advantages that include
Figure 3
improved aircraft performance Airlines have many opportunities
and economics. The A380’s to save fuel during every single
fuel consumption per passenger flight. These opportunities are
kilometre makes it the most fuel widely known and generally
efficient aircraft in service today. understood. They can be divided
The A320neo (new engine option) into four basic groups:
will soon deliver outstanding fuel • Optimized flight profiles: Flying
efficiency through the introduction the most efficient routes at
of the latest generation of the most efficient speeds and
engines and aerodynamics on altitudes. We discuss this further
an existing platform. The all in the next section
new A350XWB’s (Extra Wide (“Fuel efficient routes”).
Body) low weight composite • Operational procedures: Directly
structure, ultra efficient engines reduce fuel consumed with
and advanced aerodynamics, will initiatives such as reduced APU
also deliver class leading levels (Auxiliary Power Unit) use
of performance in the long-range, or single engine taxiing.
4
05
tsaf
Fuel and emissions eFFiciency - SAVING FUEL AND REDUCING EMISSIoNS: A JoINT UNDERTAKING
• Maintenance: Restoring airframe Queues to join runways, holding
and engine condition patterns, airspace restrictions,
Airbus and the Air
to minimize aerodynamic drag ILS (Instrument Landing System)
Traffic Management
and maximize efficiency. approaches, they all have their
• Weight reduction: Every role to play in the non-optimized reform
kilogramme of weight carried by flight profile. Noise abatement Airbus’ ProSky organisation
the aircraft consumes extra fuel. trajectories can also increase flight offers products and services
Weight can be optimized distances. designed to support the
in many areas, for example, Furthermore, in some regions, development of the Air Traffic
Management (ATM) industry
cabin service, potable water notably North America and Europe,
throughout the world. It also
and even with fuel carried. the capacity of the current ATM
enables the deployment of highly
infrastructures are approaching
efficient operating procedures
These and many other initiatives their limits. This leads to delays
that airlines can exploit today.
are discussed in widely available and other inefficiencies and also
documents. Airbus’ contribution represents a significant risk to For example, QuoVadis
to this library can be found in commercial aviation growth. which is part of ProSky’s
the ‘Getting to Grips’ series of Airbus’ contribution to addressing group, has amassed significant
documents. The two highlighted in these issues is outlined in the experience in the design and
deployment of airport approach
figure 3 offer an excellent starting Airbus and ATC reform text box.
and departure procedures that
point for anyone interested in the
deliver considerable savings
subject of fuel efficiency but the Implementing
for the operators using them.
these series also include several
a fuel efficient The procedures are based
titles for those wishing to develop on RNP (Required Navigation
their expertise. All these brochures operation Performance) technology, which
can be downloaded from the Flight is available for all Airbus aircraft.
Operations community of the The development process
AirbusWorld portal. Raising awareness of and dealing is done in full collaboration with
the local ATM community.
with fuel efficiency, across the
Fuel efficient airline’s organisation can also be
Metron, also part of
facilitated through formal training.
routes ProSky’s group, offers Air
Here again, Airbus offers a number
Navigation Service Providers
of courses for both the specialists (ANSP), airport authorities
and non-specialists. and airlines an innovative, cost
One of the methods for reducing
Identifying initiatives that can effective solution to optimize
fuel consumption is to optimize
save fuel is just the start of the traffic flow and minimize delays.
the flight profile, including speeds
story. These initiatives need to The partnership with ATRiCS
and altitudes. provides a tool for airport tower
be evaluated with all stakeholders
Usually the most economic routing controllers that gives them
to ensure that they do indeed
is the most direct one. It also engine start times for every
represent an overall cost reduction
avoids waiting in line to take-off, departing aircraft to allow
for the airline. Once this has been
in-flight “holding”, or waiting for the most efficient use of runway
confirmed, the initiative will need capacity while minimizing
a parking stand on arrival.
to be developed so that it can queues.
The most efficient vertical profile
be deployed across the airline’s
allows the aircraft to climb and
community in a permanent way. For further information visit
accelerate continuously to its
The notion of permanence presents www.AirbusProSky.com
optimum altitude and speed. It
a further question: How can
also allows the aircraft to descend
the airline track an initiative’s
continuously from that optimum
deployment? Again, Airbus
altitude to the destination runway.
has solutions to address these
In this way, the time that the
questions. Our Fuel and Flight
aircraft spends in its most efficient
Efficiency consulting service uses
configuration - high altitude cruise -
a process that can be adapted to
is maximized.
an airline’s specific requirements
However, the realities of the
and priorities. It is supported by
current Air Traffic Management
our fuel efficiency measuring and
(ATM) system often preclude
monitoring software tool, FEMIS
the execution of optimum flight
(Flight Efficiency Management
profiles.
and Information).
5
Fuel and emissions eFFiciency - SAVING FUEL AND REDUCING EMISSIoNS: A JoINT UNDERTAKING
05
tsaf
A collaborative
Airbus and emissions
future
Today’s aviation industry supports the global aviation
produces 2% of all man-made industry’s target of 50% net
Co2 emissions, 80% of which reduction in carbon emissions, Within this article, we have outlined
are related to passenger flights compared to 2005 levels, by 2050. the principle elements of Airbus’
exceeding 1,500km, for which To support this target, Airbus is support and services package. It is
there is no practical alternative. committed to the European Union’s designed to help airlines optimize
By comparison, maritime “Flightpath 2050” programme that
their fuel consummation. However,
emissions are 50% higher aims to deliver a 75%* reduction
recognizing the ever growing
nd road transport emissions in Co2 per passenger kilometre.
importance of this subject, Airbus
are even seven times higher than
has launched a customer working
those of the aviation industry. To fulfil its ambition, Airbus
Furthermore, in the last decade is investing nearly 2 billion euros group. The objective of the Fuel
the traffic increased more than per annum in research and Efficiency FAIR Working Group
50% but the fuel consumption only development. More than 90% is to develop Airbus’ support and
increased by 3%. of the Research and Technology services’ package to better meet
The aviation industry is on (R&T) projects have environmental the airlines’ needs. The working
the right track and Airbus fully benefits.
group’s priorities for 2012 have
* Relative to the capabilities of typical new aircraft in 2000 75% = 65% aircraft related + 10% infrastructure related. been established and developments
“Flightpath 2050” targets also include 90% Nox emissions’ reduction and 65% noise reduction.
are underway. Further information
on FAIR Working Groups can be
found in the adjacent text box.
n o t e s
What are Airbus FAIR for airline use. This established,
Working Groups? collaborative process has delivered
valuable improvements to support
FAIR Working groups are dedicated
the operational excellence
to specific domains that have been
of the Airbus fleet.
selected by the operator community.
Their goal is the identification of key The progress and results of the Fuel
issues within the domain, review Efficiency FAIR Working Group (and CONTACT DETAILS
and development solutions and all the other working groups) can be
the preparation of those solutions found on the AirbusWorld portal. Simon WESELBY
Fuel and Emissions
Performance Manager
Airbus S.A.S.
Tel: +33 (0)5 62 11 75 16
simon.weselby@airbus.com
Conclusion
These days it is common to see airlines However Airbus, its engine suppliers
citing increasing fuel costs as a reason and the aircraft operators are not the
for lower than expected financial results. only stakeholders in the fuel consumption
It is also common to see airlines showing and emissions reduction process. Risks
their “green credentials”, either through to growth and development are not just
demonstrations of green technologies limited to ever increasing fuel prices.
or by quoting the emission reductions The ability and willingness of infrastructure
they have achieved by optimising their providers, such as airports and air
operations. navigation service providers, to evolve
Airbus has, is and will continue to support and government to support (for example
operators who wish to pursue fuel in the context of biofuel development
and emissions efficiency objectives. or airspace sovereignty) are also key
Firstly, by continuing to offer the most contributors.
advanced aircraft, equipped with the most These risks can be reduced by continuing
advanced engines and secondly, to raise overall awareness, such that all
by providing support and services that stakeholders contribute to the change
help ensure that those aircraft are used process and make their respective
in the most efficient way possible. voices heard.
6
05
tsaf
airbus Fuel and Flight eFFiciency consulting services - WoRKING ToGETHER To SAVE oN AIRLINE CoSTS
Airbus Fuel
and Flight Efficiency
Consulting Services
Working together to save
on airline costs
Fuel prices fluctuate but its global trend is a the journey. Almost all now consider that fuel
long term increase. Fuel and flight efficiency efficiency is a key objective and they are looking
can be a significant source of savings for an how to reach permanent results. Airbus Fuel and
aircraft operator. Some have developed strong Flight Consulting Services help airlines save fuel.
competences. Some others are just beginning In this article, we explain how.
Serge GOLOFIER Vincent SWIDERSKI
Flight operations Flight operations
Consulting Services Director Marketing Manager
Airbus S.A.S. Airbus S.A.S.
7
airbus Fuel and Flight eFFiciency consulting services - WoRKING ToGETHER To SAVE oN AIRLINE CoSTS
05
tsaf
Choosing the right • By reaching exit B, the pilot
extends the landing distance
initiatives
leading to:
- A longer taxi distance
to the terminal – leading
Every operational fuel initiative
to a supplement of fuel burnt.
requires a proper trade-off. Let’s
- The occupation of the runaway
consider the simplified example
for a longer time – eventually
given in figure 1. After landing,
leading to a congestion
this aircraft will be given the
of aircraft waiting on the
choice by the control tower to
n o t e s taxiway.
take exit A or exit B. Which one
- Once again, maybe all
Airbus Consulting will lead to the lowest cost for the
of the above!
Services operator?
Consulting Services is part In fact, there is no good answer.
The exit A seems the best answer
of a comprehensive portfolio It can either be exit A or exit
of services, covering the airlines’ because it has a shorter taxi
B, depending on the airport
major activities (maintenance distance to the airport. But the
infrastructure, the operational
and engineering, flight operations, choice is not so easy!
conditions, etc. Only a trade-off
material and logistics and training) • Indeed, to reach exit A,
study considering the relevant
and ranging up to ‘capability the pilot must decrease the
assistance’. parameters will find the good
landing distance:
answer for each particular case.
- Either by using more thrust
For more information about Airbus
reversers - this meaning
Consulting Services, contact:
customerservices.consulting an increase of the engine Multi-disciplinary
@airbus.com thrust and therefore, increases
activities
the fuel consumption.
- Or by using more the brakes -
this leading to premature brake
On top of this, a fuel savings’
and tyre wear and therefore,
programme faces organisational
Which is the best exit? increases maintenance costs.
challenges. Indeed, fuel initiatives
- Maybe both!
usually concern multiple depart-
Figure 1
ments such as flight preparations,
flight operations, ground opera-
tions, maintenance, engineering,
etc. A project leader needs to
develop an appropriate organisa-
tion and communicate the proper
Exit B
arguments to convince all of the
involved stakeholders.
Exit A
AIRPORT
FEMIS
FEMIS (Flight Efficiency Management FEMIS automatically processes FEMIS was developed in collaboration
and Information System) is the aircraft’s actual flight data from with Teledyne for both Airbus
a ground-based software designed digital recorders and compares and non-Airbus aircraft. Its license
for the monitoring it with the flight plans. on the one can be purchased either on an annual
of fuel and flight hand, users explore this data basis, or on a temporarily basis
efficiency. and identify potential savings. through the “spot-check” service.
on the other hand, it provides FEMIS can also be deployed as
a global overview of savings’ part of Airbus Consulting Services’
initiatives, thanks to relevant reports missions. For more information,
and indicators. please contact:
marketingcontact.FEMIS@airbus.com
8
9
05
tsaf
airbus Fuel and Flight eFFiciency consulting services - WoRKING ToGETHER To SAVE oN AIRLINE CoSTS
q
To confront this challenge, the for an airline but fuel initiatives
q u o t e
project leader should: can be internally perceived as
• Have an empowered multi- contradictory. As an example,
From Air Arabia:
functional team representing loading too much fuel reserves
A successful consulting
all stakeholders, increases the aircraft weight, and
mission
• Implement a monitoring therefore its fuel consumption.
programme, ensuring the However, loading less fuel reserves “Airbus performed
a Fuel & Flight
follow-up of the most important can make a pilot uncomfortable
Efficiency project
indicators. because of a potential flight
focused on a
diversion. An initiative must
diagnosis with
Last but not least, safety must be a consider safety from the beginning
Air Arabia,
key competence. This sounds basic to be successful. covering a fleet
of thirty A320.
Since Air Arabia was already
The fuel manager's dilemma experienced with its own fuel
conservation programme,
the objective given by Air Arabia
was for the Airbus Consulting team
to validate and quantify
their current initiatives.
The Airbus Consulting team also
identified areas of improvements
and defined potential savings
achievable.
The immediate implementation
of new initiatives is already bringing
benefits for the airline.”
Mr. Ismail Mohamed
Director of Engineering
Air Arabia
CONTACT DETAILS
Serge GOLOFIER Vincent SWIDERSKI
Flight operations Flight operations
Consulting Services Director Marketing Manager
Airbus S.A.S. Airbus S.A.S.
Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 15 41 Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 04 45
serge.golofier@airbus.com vincent.swiderski@airbus.com
Conclusion
The objective of Airbus Fuel and Flight just need a validation of their current
Efficiency Consulting Services is not only initiatives, the identification
to help the airlines save on fuel, but of new opportunities and the benchmark
to bring a real optimisation information. Airbus Fuel and Flight
in flight preparations, flight operations, Efficiency Consulting Services investigate
maintenance and engineering, while airlines’ operations through different
saving on costs at the same time actions including data processing with
by studying each case individually. Airbus FEMIS software, procedure
Some airlines need full guidance for analysis, face-to-face meetings, etc.
the identification of potential savings At the end of the mission, these various
and the implementation of fuel initiatives. actions result in a tailored answer to
Others, which are more advanced match the identified airlines’ needs for fuel
in the fuel efficiency management process, efficient operations.
9
the 4d-trajectory management - FLIGHT EFFICIENT TRAFFIC SEQUENCING BASED oN AIRCRAFT PREDICTIoNS
05
tsaf
The 4D-trajectory
management
Flight efficient traffic sequencing
based on aircraft predictions
On 10th February 2012, an A320 test aircraft such as Eurocontrol MUAC (Maastricht Upper
flew from Toulouse (France) to Copenhagen Area Control) centre, NORACON (NORth
(Denmark) and Stockholm (Sweden), testing the European and Austrian CONsortium) and Airbus.
initial step of a highly innovative Air Traffic This “initial 4D-trajectory management” concept
Management (ATM) concept - the 4D-trajectory improves the Air Traffic Management (ATM) by
management. using ‘time’ with early traffic sequencing based
This flight which was a world premiere was the on the aircraft’s waypoint passage predictions,
culmination of months of collaboration between thus enabling to fly optimal flight profiles. It is
several partners within the SESAR (Single planned to be deployed from 2017, paving the
European Sky ATM Research) programme way to the “full 4D-trajectory management”
including avionics and ground equipment concept, covering all flight phases, which should
manufacturers, Air Navigation Service Providers enter-into-service beyond 2020.
Olivier DE-LA-BURGADE Pierre NERI Sylvain RAYNAUD
Senior Manager SESAR FMS Designer SESAR & ATM FMS
ATM Engineering Airbus operations Airbus operations
Airbus operations
10
05
tsaf
the 4d-trajectory management - FLIGHT EFFICIENT TRAFFIC SEQUENCING BASED oN AIRCRAFT PREDICTIoNS
What is a longitude and the vertical), plus
the time. It means that the Time Of
4D-trajectory?
Arrival (TOA) at each waypoint
along the trajectory is estimated
The full 4D-trajectory management with an improved accuracy and
is one of the key pillars of the reliability. These predictions are
European ATM target concept for not aiming at constraining the
2020+ that has been defined by the aircraft along all the waypoints
SESAR programme, in order to cope during the flight (with an exception
with the worldwide traffic growth of very few waypoints when it is
and the continuous increasing required for traffic constraints),
environmental constraints. they are only used to get a more
In this concept, the aircraft accurate picture of the traffic flow
trajectory is built before the flight, evolution far in advance, and then
collaboratively between the aircraft to adjust it efficiently with the
operator and the Air Navigation offered airspace capacity.
Services Providers (ANSP),
considering both the airline’s This concept is based on the use
business criteria and the air traffic of 4D-trajectories from take-
constraints in the concerned areas. off to landing (even for airport
It can be updated during the flight surface operations in the ultimate
using avionics systems, in order steps), and requires significant
to integrate new constraints such improvements and upgrades in
as meteorological constraints not ground Air Traffic Management
known before flight. This trajectory systems and procedures, as well as
is defined in four dimensions (4D) in the airlines operations’ control
which are composed of the three centres.
geometrical dimensions (latitude, Initial 4D-trajectory management
Data-Link exchanges
Figure 1
EN-ROUTE
ATC: Air Traffic Control centre
3 ATCO: Air Traffic Controller
1 2 5 6
4 ETA: Expected Time of Arrival
FMS: Flight Management System
RTA at merge point
RTA: Requested Time of Arrival
TMA: Terminal Area
TMA
AIRPORT
ATC
Trajectory dialogue via Data-Link Trajectory execution
1 3D route clearance: ATC sends the route to be followed by the aircraft down to the runway via Data-Link
2 4D predicted trajectory: The aircraft downlinks the updated airborne trajectory predictions (3D + time) after inserting the route clearance in the FMS
3 ETA min/max window request: ATC requests reliable ETA min/max window for merge point
4 ETA min/max window: Aircraft downlinks the reliable ETA min/max
5 RTA instruction: ATCO chooses a RTA in the ETA min/max window and uplinks this feasible RTA
6 4D predicted trajectory: The aircraft downlinks the updated airborne trajectory predictions (3D + time) after insertion of the RTA in the FMS
11
the 4d-trajectory management - FLIGHT EFFICIENT TRAFFIC SEQUENCING BASED oN AIRCRAFT PREDICTIoNS
05
tsaf
As this full step will take time on time, allowing a smooth
to be deployed and to pave the integration of the aircraft into the
way to this ambitious concept optimum arrival sequence.
while getting early benefits,
SESAR’s partners have defined an During the flight test performed
intermediate step called the initial this year, the 4D-trajectory man-
4D-trajectory (i-4D) management, agement concept has been tested
less demanding in terms of through several i-4D descents,
improvements for the short/mid- some starting in the Maastricht
term. (Netherlands) airspace and end-
i n f o r m a t i o n
ing in the TMA of Copenhagen
What is SESAR? The i-4D management consists (Denmark), and others starting in
in ground systems using time the Malmö (Sweden) airspace and
The Single European Sky ATM estimates computed by the aircraft, ending in the TMA of Stockholm
Research programme to establish far in advance an (Sweden).
is the operational and technological optimal arrival sequence of all the All these i-4D descents were suc-
answer to the major challenges
aircraft in the traffic converging cessful and permitted to validate
of European air traffic growth.
to a merging point in a congested the concept in several different
The aim of this programme
area. This merging point can be, operational conditions.
is to ensure the modernisation
for instance, the entry point of a Once proven and industrialized,
of the European Air Traffic
Management system by dense TMA (Terminal Area - initial i-4D will allow the aircraft to
coordinating and concentrating approach fix), as it was experienced plan and fly an optimized and
all relevant research and during the flight test performed efficient profile, without any need
development efforts in the European earlier this year from Toulouse for the controllers to provide any
Union. Partnerships, sustainability (France) to the north of Europe. vectoring instruction. This will
and user-drive are key concepts
In this type of operation, each offer better predictability of the
of the SESAR approach. Founded
aircraft converging to the merging traffic flow, facilitate fuel-efficient
by the European Commission and
point agrees a 2D route with the descent operations while reducing
by Eurocontrol, 15 companies
Air Traffic Control (ATC) centre emissions, and will contribute to
are members of the SESAR Joint
Undertaking programme: AENA, before the Top Of Descent (TOD). decreasing traffic conflicts upon
Airbus, Alenia Aeronautica, DFS, Then, each aircraft transmits a arrivals into airports. Thus, aircraft
DSNA, ENAV, Frequentis, Honeywell, time window in which it could flying in a holding pattern will be
Indra, NATMIG, NATS (En Route) reach the merging point while still notably reduced.
Limited, NoRACoN, SEAC, SELEX keeping an optimal descent profile.
Sistemi Integrati and Thales.
All these air-ground exchanges are The impact
made by Data-Link.
on avionics
In the next step, considering all the
traffic converging to the merging
point, the ATC centre managing On the airborne side, the i-4D
the TMA selects a target time capability will be available on most
within the time window sent by Airbus aircraft through software
the aircraft, at which the aircraft upgrades. It mainly concerns two
should reach its target waypoint to airborne systems:
optimize the traffic flow. This target • The Flight Management System
time is sent through the Data-Link (FMS), in order to improve
system from this ATC centre to the management of the time
the aircraft (via the en-route ATC constraints,
centre managing the flight before • The Data-Link communication
the TOD). The target time received system (Air Traffic Services
by the aircraft is then loaded and Unit - ATSU on the A320),
activated in the Flight Management in order to be able to exchange
System (FMS), so that the aircraft new Controller-Pilot
manages automatically the flight Data-Link Communication
Air Traffic Controllers on the job
to meet the merging point (figure (CPDLC) messages and
2). This ensures that the aircraft send 4D predictions through
flies its optimal flight profile up ADS-C (Automatic Dependent
to the merging point and reaches it Surveillance – on Contract).
12
05
tsaf
the 4d-trajectory management - FLIGHT EFFICIENT TRAFFIC SEQUENCING BASED oN AIRCRAFT PREDICTIoNS
Target time received by the aircraft
The required upgrade for the then loaded and activated in the FMS
i-4D Data-Link capability will be
particularly light for all aircraft Figure 2
flying in Europe which have to
be FANS-ATN (Future Air
Navigation System - Aeronautical
Telecommunications Network)
Data-Link equipped in the coming
years to comply with the Link
2000+ mandate (read FAST 48
magazine - FANS for A320 and
A330/A340 families).
I-4D trials
in the framework
of SESAR
Several actors of the Air Traffic
Management sector joined the
efforts in the frame of SESAR,
to support the full validation
of this innovative concept:
• As ground systems’
manufacturers: Indra and Thales
Air Systems,
• As avionics manufacturers
(for the FMS prototypes):
Honeywell and Thales Avionics,
• As Air Navigation Service
Providers: Eurocontrol MUAC
and NORACON Air Traffic
Control centres,
• And Airbus, as aircraft
manufacturer and avionics
integrator, but also as an
avionics’ manufacturer (for
the airborne Data-Link system
prototype).
The flight test which took place
at the beginning of 2012
is one of the main achievements
of this partnership, testing
in real conditions the ground
and airborne system prototypes
developed by the industrial
partners. However, this flight test
is only one part of a complete
validation campaign, aiming
at validating both technical and
operational aspects. Within this
campaign, several other trials,
not only using flight test aircraft
but also simulators, are planned
over the next two years.
13
title title - SUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE
05
tsaf
the 4d-trajectory management - FLIGHT EFFICIENT TRAFFIC SEQUENCING BASED oN AIRCRAFT PREDICTIoNS
14
05
tsaf
In this framework, the operational These simulations are mainly
benefits of the i-4D operations focused on the usability
will be assessed thanks to two of airborne and ATC systems,
different types of exercises: human factors and operational
• Mixed fleet simulations: Real procedures.
time simulations where a full • Fast time simulations:
fleet of aircraft is generated Simulations with no human
with a predetermined percentage in the loop and which should
of i-4D equipped aircraft and allow computing the operational
controlled by live controllers benefits in terms of fuel burn,
from the Air Traffic Control airspace capacity use and traffic
(ATC) centres. It is even optimisation.
possible to connect the Airbus
integration simulators to the
controller’s simulators to
integrate real pilots in the loop.
CONTACT DETAILS Pierre NERI
SESAR FMS Designer
Olivier DE-LA-BURGADE Airbus operations
Senior Manager Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 89 79
ATM Engineering pierre.neri@airbus.com
Airbus operations
Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 20 46 Sylvain RAYNAUD
olivier.de-la-burgade@airbus.com SESAR & ATM FMS
Airbus operations
Conclusion Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 58 50
sylvain.raynaud@airbus.com
Thanks to the expertise of several partners an intermediate concept called the initial
working in complementary fields, the 4D-trajectory management has been
4D-trajectory management concept has defined. This short to mid-term concept
started to become a reality, reconciling has been tested successfully. The main
medium to high traffic density with flight challenge is now to prepare and ensure
efficiency, through better predictability a synchronized deployment, both on
of aircraft trajectories. The concept aircraft and in Air Traffic Control centres,
which is supported by the SESAR (Single in order to get the associated benefits
European Sky ATM Research) programme as early as possible.
is also being considered in other regions The deployment cost for airlines should be
of the world with dense traffic, in particular limited as for most Airbus aircraft, the
in the United States through the NextGen ‘full and initial 4D-trajectory’ capabilities
(Next Generation) programme. As the will require only software upgrades.
full step will take time to be deployed,
14
05
tsaf
airbus technical aog centre - 24 HoURS IN AIRTAC
Airbus Technical
AOG Centre
24 Hours in AIRTAC
Dedicated teams of highly qualified structures a new service called AiRTHM (Airbus Real Time
and systems’ support engineers are staffing Health Monitoring). The objective of this new
AIRTAC, around the clock and the whole year activity - actually in service and will be proposed
round. These experienced aeronautical engineers, as an extension of the Flight Hour Services (FHS)
mostly coming from different areas in Airbus offer - is to health monitor the Airbus A380 fleet
or from an airline maintenance environment, in real time and thanks to its modern technology,
know perfectly well how an Aircraft-On-Ground to anticipate, solve AOG issues, or reduce work
(AOG) hurts the airline’s operation, thus creating stoppage situations.
the motivation to deal with the airlines’ queries to In this article, we invite you to share 24 hours in
get them solved as quickly as possible. In addition AIRTAC’s very closed and confined environment,
to its support activities, AIRTAC has expanded but open to the world, while we assist Airbus
its scope of activities and is now proposing customers by providing state-of-the-art support.
Ronie GNECCO Damien CUSSAC
AIRTAC Structures Engineer AIRTAC Systems Engineer
Airbus Engineering Airbus Engineering
15
05
tsaf
airbus technical aog centre - 24 HoURS IN AIRTAC
History of AIRTAC Entry-Into-Service (EIS) of the
A340-500/600, the A318 and the
A380. And of course, AIRTAC is
The idea to move from the old
starting to look ahead to be ready
AIRTAC is a 365-day, 24-hour on-call out-of-hours support to a
centre where specialist engineers full 24/7 dedicated support centre for the EIS of the A350.
are always available to help Airbus
had existed for a long time, but it
customers’ aircraft get back The first year, AIRTAC had
really started to take shape in the
in operation. answered a bit less than 4,000
early 2000’s with the Airbus fleet
To carry out these technological queries from Airbus customers, of
growth. This, combined with the
enhancements, a challenging
which around 75% of the issues
Information System (IS) programme market considering more and more
were solved directly by AIRTAC.
was set up to centralize and this type of support as state-of-the-
Each following years, more than
better control real-time business art, led to the opening of the Airbus
13,000 queries have been treated.
information, with an integrated Technical AOG Centre, AIRTAC,
control tower concept providing on 7th February 2003.
all the critical information to Based on its ever growing
manage each customer’s issues. experience, AIRTAC’s service has
Airbus inaugurated today’s set up
been recognized and appreciated
of AIRTAC’s modern facilities in
by Airbus customers, and their
Blagnac (France), in December
inputs are carefully studied in
2005. The new facilities are fitted
order to ensure that the service
with the most innovative technol-
provided stays in line with Airbus
ogy and leading-edge solutions.
customers’ expectations.
These enhancements represent
a multi-million Euro investment
AIRTAC oBJECTIVE:
that enables Airbus to provide
n o t e s
its worldwide customers with
To provide structural repair and
The term AoG should not be used improved technical support, and
engineering advice to address tech-
if the aircraft is on a maintenance an even wider range of engineering
nical AOGs and work stoppages.
planning. The term AoG is used for services.
aircraft in operation and is meant
to keep the aircraft in service with AIRTAC oRGANISATIoN:
The aim of AIRTAC’s team is
a temporary repair and approval.
to minimize on-the-ground time
on the other hand, during the A complete staff of 44 people
for aircraft for troubleshooting and
aircraft maintenance, we can have composed of:
repairs.
a so called “work stoppage”,
• Eight teams available 24/7
in which case the maintenance
- each team being composed
facility is awaiting Airbus’ technical In 2007, the staff was increased
of two structures, two systems’
repair approval. to keep up the pace with the
engineers and one AiRTHM growing workload. AIRTAC
engineer,
has been involved as of the
16
05
tsaf
title title - SUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE
AIRTAC FEBRUARy 2003
17
05
tsaf
airbus technical aog centre - 24 HoURS IN AIRTAC
• Three Maintenance Innovation
i n f o r m a t i o n
Team (MIT) engineers on
standard hours,
All messages delivered to AIRTAC’s to be blocked. Therefore, try
• The head of the AIRTAC mailbox are limited to five to resize or divide the messages
department who manages mega-bytes, causing some and contact AIRTAC’s front desk
the teams. technical messages including in order to check that your message
damage reports and/or pictures was correctly received.
AIRTAC MISSIoN:
AIRTAC structures, systems and
AiRTHM engineers all ensure that
the customers’ Airbus aircraft are
flying safely and with the best
Operational Reliability (OR).
AIRTAC engineers meet all the
customers’ demands and ensure
a proactive support in any high-
stress situation, around the world
and around the clock.
AIRTAC is Airbus’ front line with
the customers and is the entry
point for any AOG, but also for
accidents and major incidents.
AIRTAC
development
24 hours AIRTAC ToDAy
in AIRTAC
“Ladies and Gentlemen. Welcome
on-board the Airbus Technical
AOG Centre. We wish you a
pleasant reading while following
some issues dealt in AIRTAC
during 24 hours. Please remain
seated at all times and remember
that only AOG and work stoppage
situations are permitted during
your reading.”
17
24 hours with airtac
0 H 6 h 12 H 18 H 24 H
05
tsaf
erutcurtS
smetsyS
emiT
laeR
subriA
gnirotinoM
htlaeH
A320 AOG
Aircraft found with a previous permanent repair disbonded from the
RH INBD Flap Leading Edge between Rib 4 and Rib 5. The customer
doesn’t have the manpower to perform a permanent repair.
Airline question:
Airline proposes to apply high speed tape on the disbonded area
to cover the rear closure of the T/E for 1,000FC, and to perform
a DVI at the affected locations every 100FC.
AIRTAC answer:
AIRTAC informs the customer that the repair proposal is not acceptable
Response Time: 3 h due to the extent of damage and provides the repair instructions
to be performed as per the SRM.
RT: 1 h
A330 work stoppage
Response Time: 5 h A part needs to be replaced on a manifold.
Airline question:
Airline needs to have confirmation that the valve P/N D31AB4453
is included within the manifold P/N D31AB4415.
AIRTAC answer:
AIRTAC advises that as per CMM 32-31-31 of the manifold,
the valve gear selector P/N D31AB4453 is a sub-assembly part
of the manifold P/N D31AB4415.
A380 In-Flight
“BRAKES RELEASED” warning fault was triggered associated
with “MoNIToRING UNIT-WLG, RH WHEEL 4(58GG2)”.
Fault confirmed thanks to an uplink made from the AiRTHM front desk.
RT: 1 h AIRTAC action:
AiRTHM team advises the airline to pass the TSM task “Tachometer
continuity fault on the RH WLG" associated to this fault code.
AFT: Aft - AOG: Aircraft-On-Ground - CMM: Component Maintenance Manual - DVI: Detail Visual Inspection - ESPM: Electrical Standard Practices Manual
FC: Flight Cycles - F/CTL: Flight Control - Fig: Figure - FR: Frame - INBD: Inboard - NVM: Non-Volatile Memory - MCE: Motor Control Electronic
MEL: Minimum Equipment List - P/N: Part Number - O/B: Out Board - RAS: Repair design Approval Sheet - RH: Right Hand - RT: Response Time
SFCC: Slat Flap Control Computer - SIL: Service Information Letter - SRM: Structure Repair Manual - T/E: Trailing Edge - TSM: Trouble-Shooting Manual
WLG: Wing Landing Gear
18
24 hours with airtac
0 H 6 h 12 H 18 H 24 H
erutcurtS
smetsyS
emiT
laeR
subriA
gnirotinoM
htlaeH
05
tsaf
A380 work stoppage A330 work stoppage
During cargo loading, damage was located on the AFT Cargo Door frame web at FR81. During the aircraft painting, the RH wing is damaged by the lift technician
creating an impact on the o/B T/E.
Airline question:
Airline question:
Airline requests approval to dispatch the aircraft with the damage as is for 100FC.
According to the SRM 57-55-00 Fig 108, the damage falls under zone
AIRTAC answer: 5 & 6 and Airbus is to be contacted for assistance.
A temporary repair analysis is done by AIRTAC and the quality check
AIRTAC answer:
of the damage report is performed. Airbus Design Office is contacted in order
AIRTAC advises the customer that due to the extent of damage,
to have repair/approval comments. The customer is allowed to operate
the flap needs to be sent to an approved Repair Station and Airbus
the aircraft with this damage “as is» for the next 100FC, performing a DVI
AOG Spares needs to be contacted in order to provide the part availability,
on the affected framework area to ensure a crack free condition.
lead time and price.
Airline comments:
“Thank you very much
for this efficient recovery.
It has been a great
relieve for our customer
management to receive a
RT: 2 h
RAS for 100FC. Our flight
will be slightly delayed,
but it will be operated by
our same A380, and no
passenger will be left on
ground". Response Time: 4 h
A340 work stoppage
Feeder cable P/N 2456-5325 needs to be replaced with a hydraulic
crimp tool and a crimp head.
Airline question:
Airline requests if there are any alternative tools for a cable
replacement. A310 work stoppage
Passenger oxygen generators P/N 117042-02
AIRTAC answer:
and 117019-02 are about to expire and customer’s stock
Referring to the ESPM 20-48-12, AIRTAC advises the operator that
balance is only sufficient for the replacement
no alternative tool has been identified and suggests contacting Airbus
RT: 2 h of the effected generators with P/N 117016-03.
AOG Spares to check the availability of the tool needed.
Airline question:
AIRTAC is contacted to provide comments/acceptance
to use P/N 117016-03 instead of P/N 117042-02
and P/N 117019-02.
AIRTAC answer:
AIRTAC advises the customer that in accordance with
SIL 35-007, the P/N 117028-02 can be replaced
by P/N 117019-02 or P/N 117042-02.
A380 one hour after take-off
“F/CTL SLAT SyS 1” fault triggered combined with “Electric Drive Fault, Slats”.
This item is No Go, a deviation of the MEL is not possible and no Electric Motor spare is available in outstation
Fault confirmed thanks to an uplink made from the AiRTHM front desk.
AIRTAC action:
AiRTHM front desk confirms the fault and advises the airline to reset both NVM (SFCC1 & SFCC2) and perform
several times an operational test of the slat and droop nose system.
RT: 1 h
The airline afterwards sends an electric drive motor from main base to outstation and installs it in the aircraft.
The aircraft is serviceable and is operated with no delay.
AFT: Aft - AOG: Aircraft-On-Ground - CMM: Component Maintenance Manual - DVI: Detail Visual Inspection - ESPM: Electrical Standard Practices Manual These are only a few examples of situations that AIRTAC need to deal with on a daily bases. Of course, some days are busier than others and we kindly
FC: Flight Cycles - F/CTL: Flight Control - Fig: Figure - FR: Frame - INBD: Inboard - NVM: Non-Volatile Memory - MCE: Motor Control Electronic remind our customers that AIRTAC must only be contacted for AOGs and work stoppage situations. Airbus Field Representatives and your Customer Support
MEL: Minimum Equipment List - P/N: Part Number - O/B: Out Board - RAS: Repair design Approval Sheet - RH: Right Hand - RT: Response Time Directors remain your initial focal point.
SFCC: Slat Flap Control Computer - SIL: Service Information Letter - SRM: Structure Repair Manual - T/E: Trailing Edge - TSM: Trouble-Shooting Manual AIRTAC, the Airbus AOG centre runs around the world, around the clock and the whole year round.
WLG: Wing Landing Gear
19
airbus technical aog centre - 24 HoURS IN AIRTAC
New Airbus Real Even if all the maintenance tasks
cannot be scheduled in advance,
Time Health
Airbus’ objective is to help its
Monitoring customers to provide solutions in
order to anticipate system failures
(AiRTHM) service
and associated troubleshooting, as
much as possible.
Being able to reduce at the Some solutions are already
maximum aircraft ground-time has available but the objective of the
always been a target for the opera- newly created AiRTHM service is
tors and aircraft manufacturers. to go further.
Therefore, maintenance planning With the introduction of the
is a key element in everyday new generation aircraft, the
aircraft operations. maintenance systems (Centralized
Maintenance System, Aircraft
Condition Monitoring System,
etc.) enable to get access to a
large number of parameters, both
in-flight and on-ground. Moreover,
by using ACARS (Aircraft
Communication Addressing and
Reporting System), Airbus is now
able to collect those parameters
and analyze the system data from a
remote location.
Thanks to this technological evo-
lution, AiRTHM is available to
provide a new and innovative
‘real time health monitoring’ for
A380 aircraft. It is based on new
processes developed by the Airbus
AIRTAC-MIT (Maintenance
Innovation Team) with the objec-
tive to improve the A380 custom-
ers’ Operational Reliability and
maintenance scheduling, whilst
reducing the associated costs.
Initially launched in Airbus’ Flight
Test department, a prototype
has been setup and further
developed within AIRTAC-MCC
(Maintenance Control Centre).
Its objective is to:
• Provide real time
troubleshooting assistance
and guidance for the customers
to anticipate spares’ provisioning
and corrective actions,
in cooperation with Airbus’
worldwide field representation
stations,
• Monitor systems prior the
aircraft’s departure to anticipate
a return to the gate,
• Perform system health
monitoring in order to anticipate
eventual failure detections.
05
tsaf
Screenshots of real time health monitoring
Blurred on purpose
RDAS: Repair Design Approval Sheet
DVI: Detailed Visual Inspection - EPSU: Emergency Power Supply Unit
ESPM: Electrical Standard Practices Manual - HFEC: High Frequency Eddy Current
SSA: Side Slip Angle - TD: Technical Disposition - T/E: Trailing Edge
TRU: Transformer Rectifier Unit
20
21
05
tsaf
airbus technical aog centre - 24 HoURS IN AIRTAC
The AIRTAC-MCC action plan is This allows her/him to:
based on four steps: • View the sequence and details
1] Identify the fault message of the aircraft data,
which can cause a potential • Choose parameters and request
delay (alerting function), their values to the aircraft
2] Uplink to the aircraft to collect in return,
further data, • Analyze the collected data
3] Analyze the results, versus previous similar cases.
4] Advise the customer.
Based on the gathered information,
An alerting system is deployed on the AIRTAC-MCC engineer is
the AIRTAC’s screen wall. able to quickly provide a tuned
Amongst the hundreds of aircraft technical advice. This enables
messages and based on the list the operator to ease its aircraft
of operational data transmitted dispatch.
which has been mutually agreed
with the customer, the messages The AiRTHM service solution
potentially leading to a delay or an is currently available and is used
Operational Interruption (OI) are to ease each A380 Entry-Into-
filtered and displayed for further Service (EIS). This service will
investigation. then be extended to the Flight Hour
Services (FHS) customers. The
For the analysis, each system next step will also be to prepare
engineer has access to a set of tools the A350’s EIS and contribute to
and engineering expertise. an even higher level of smooth
operations.
CONTACT DETAILS
Ronie GNECCO Damien CUSSAC
AIRTAC Structures Engineer AIRTAC Systems Engineer
Airbus Engineering Airbus Engineering
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 39 01 Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 60 96
ronie.gnecco@airbus.com damien.cussac@airbus.com
Conclusion
AIRTAC (AIRbus Technical AOG Centre), Operational Reliability and maintenance
with its qualified structures and systems’ scheduling, whilst reducing
support engineers is a state-of-the-art the associated costs.
support service available 24/7 handling The involvement of the Airbus’ Field
both, AOG or work stoppage situations Representatives and the Customer
for Airbus aircraft. Support Directors remain
AIRTAC has set its mission to provide the customers’ focal point, providing
an answer to the customers’ queries they can immediately support and assist
within a four hours time frame for the the customers to dispatch the routine
AOG situations and 12 hours for work technical queries to the relevant Airbus
stoppages, that is a challenge by itself Customer Support or Engineering
considering the continuous growth department.
of Airbus’ fleet. AIRTAC is participating to develop
The newly created AiRTHM (Airbus Real the future of aviation with pro-active
Time Health Monitoring) service has been maintenance and a personalized
set up to provide, as its name clearly customer support.
stands for, ‘real time health monitoring’ For AIRTAC’s team, ‘Today is Already
for Airbus aircraft. This innovative service Tomorrow’ to cover your ‘Turn Around
helps Airbus’ customers improve their Time’.
21
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
05
tsaf
Cabin air quality:
The key
to a comfortable flight
How to make an aircraft breathe
On aircraft, cabin air quality contributes and what is Airbus doing to preserve good air
significantly to the comfort and well being of quality in the aircraft cabin? Let’s take a journey
passengers and crews alike. But what is actually into the technical depths of the rather abstract
cabin air quality, what is the importance attributed term of “cabin air quality”.
to cabin air quality in aircraft design and operation,
Dr. Andreas BEZOLD
Environmental Control Systems
Air Quality
Airbus operations
22
05
tsaf
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
Aircraft operating Air quality, temperature and
d e f i n i t i o n
pressure are important parameters
environment
which are directly controlled by
Troposphere: The lowest region
the environmental control system. of the atmosphere between the
earth's surface and the tropopause,
Civil aviation occupies a position
Definition of cabin characterized by decreasing
of particular importance among
temperature with increasing
modes of public transportation, due air quality and its altitude.
to its environmental and operating
relation to smell
conditions. Commercial aircraft Tropopause
operate primarily in the troposphere The boundary layer between
and lower stratosphere, depending the troposphere and stratosphere.
As indicated in figure 1, cabin
on their geographic position. This It is defined as the lowest level
air quality is defined by the at which the temperature lapse rate
is an environment that is hostile to
content of gaseous, particulate decreases by 2°C km-1 or less,
life. The outside temperature can
and biological contaminants in to reach an average of -56°C.
drop to below -50C, the ambient
the air. Besides this, other factors
pressure can decrease to less than
like temperature, humidity, or Stratosphere: The region of the
200hPa (hectopascal), which is one atmosphere above the troposphere
even aircraft movement can have
fifth the ambient pressure on the and below the mesosphere.
an influence on our perception
surface of the earth and high ozone
of air quality. Such influences
concentrations may occur.
and real air contamination issues
The aircraft cabin becomes
are difficult to disentangle, and
increasingly part of our normal
physiological perceptions cannot
habitat and is therefore subject
always be attributed to airborne
to high expectations. Besides
contaminations.
the ergonomic design and the
amenities, there are also other
factors with an impact on passenger
and crew well-being that we have
The cabin environment
to take into consideration.
and its influencing factors
Figure 1
CCCaaabbbiiinnn
eeennnvvviiirrrooonnnmmmeeennnttt
CCCooonnntttaaammmiiinnnaaannnttt TTThhheeerrrmmmaaalll CCCaaabbbiiinnn NNNoooiiissseee &&& SSeeaatt
cccooonnntttrrrooolll cccooommmfffooorrrttt ppprrreeessssssuuurrreee vvviiibbbrrraaatttiiiooonnnsss eerrggoonnoommiiccss
Dust Temperature Cabin pressure Noise
(Air, Sidewall)
VViissuuaall // SSppaaccee
Bacteria / Viruses / Rate of change Vibrations
iimmpprreessssiioonn
Fungi Humidity
Turbulences
CO2, CO Air Velocity
IInn--FFlliigghhtt
EEnntteerrttaaiinnmmeenntt
VOCs, SVOCs
Ozone FFoooodd //
Influence on perception of air quality BBeevveerraaggeess
Air Quality
23
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
Cooling - Expansion Cooling
Cold ambient air:
Ambient pressure
Low temperature
Hot bleed air:
High pressure
High temperature
MHX
Cold bleed air:
PHX
FCV Reh C Lo a w bi n te p m re p s e s r u a r tu e re
Engines / APU / WE
High pressure
ground cart
Fan CMP TRB Cond
PCKV
TCV
Hot ambient air:
Ambient pressure
High temperature
05
tsaf
Heat
Absorption
Cabin air quality 1] It supplies fresh air and,
in connection with this,
in the aircraft
removes air pollutants from
environmental the cabin replacing used air,
2] It pressurizes the aircraft
control design
fuselage and,
3] It controls the temperature
in the cabin and cools technical
The main and most powerful
equipment.
approach to removing contaminants
on state-of-the-art aircraft is by
During flight, pressurized outside
air exchange. Outside air which
air is taken from the compressor
is usually very clean, particularly
stage of the engines (bleed air)
during flight, is conveyed into
upstream the combustion chamber,
the pressurized fuselage and
where temperatures up to 400°C
approximately the same amount
can be reached, passed through
is discarded overboard by the
a pre-cooler unit and conveyed
environmental control system. The
to the “air conditioning pack” at
entire cabin air is exchanged with
a temperature of approximately
outside air every three minutes. As
200°C. Alternative bleed air
a prerequisite to maintain excellent
supply sources during ground, or
air quality aboard aircraft, it is
near ground operations, supplying
necessary to assure cleanness
the air conditioning pack with
of the air delivered to the cabin.
pressurized and consequently hot
Consequently, it is important to
bleed air, are the Auxiliary Power
know where the air is coming from
Units (APU) and High Pressure
and which way it moves from the
Ground Carts (HPGC).
outside environment into the cabin.
The air conditioning pack (figure 2)
An aircraft environmental control
Basic principle of an aircraft cools the air to the required
system performs three main tasks:
air conditioning pack temperature using outside air (ram
air) as the cooling medium and air
Figure 2
cycle machines for compression
and expansion cooling. This
basic architecture is still the best
proven technology for aircraft air
conditioning systems with regards
to efficiency, flexibility, reliability,
installation space and maintenance
costs.
A mixer unit, installed below the
cabin floor in front of the centre
wing box, mixes outside air with
cabin air. The cabin air is taken
from the under-floor area and
drawn through recirculation filters
by recirculation fans (figure 3).
The quantity of re-circulated cabin
air mixed with the outside air varies
from 40% to 60% and improves
efficient removal of heat loads at a
moderate temperature gradient, and
increases the humidity by making
use of the cabin air. The latter
contains humidity contributed
FCV: Flow Control Valve; PHX: Primary Heat Exchanger; MHX: Main Heat Exchanger;
by the passengers whilst outside
CMP: Compressor; TRB: Turbine; TCV: Temperature Control Valve; Cond: Condenser;
WE: Water Extractor; Reh: Reheater; PCKV: Pressure ChecK Valve air, being very cold, is almost
completely dry.
24
05
tsaf
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
After leaving the mixer unit, During cruise at high altitudes,
the air is distributed to different in particular on polar routes, the
cabin zones. For each cabin zone, outside air may contain significant
a different temperature can be concentrations of ozone. To
d e f i n i t i o n
selected. Trim air valves regulate ensure a sufficiently low ozone
the cabin outlet temperature by concentration in the cabin, long Olfactory: Relating to, or
injecting small amounts of hot haul service aircraft and even most contributing to the sense of smell.
bleed air from the pre-cooler outlet of the short haul service aircraft,
Olfactory perception:
(trim air). are equipped with catalytic ozone
The sensation that results when
converters (see figure 4 on the
olfactory receptors in the nose
following page). The ozone
Air cleaning are stimulated by particular
converters are installed in the airborne chemicals.
technologies bleed air ducting upstream to the
air conditioning pack to ensure
sufficient temperature levels for
Besides the air exchange with the catalytic process. Modern
the outside air for efficient ozone converters, as introduced by
contaminant removal, additional Airbus in 2004, combine the ozone
technologies are necessary to conversion with the ability to
avoid exposure to ozone from the partially deplete kerosene vapours
operational environment and to which might occur during ground
exclude distribution of biological operations to improve the olfactory
pathogens in the cabin with the perception.
re-circulated air.
Aircraft air generation and distribution
system (here for an A340-600)
Figure 3
Cabin Zones
Crown
Flight
Deck
E/E Bay Forward Cargo Wing Box Alt Cargo Section 18
Compartment Compartment
Out Flow Bilge Out Flow
Hot Air Manifold
Recirculation Recirculation
Fan & Filter Mixer Unit Fan & Filter
Air Air Unpressurised Area
Conditioning Conditioning
Pack 1 Pack 2
Fresh & Recirc. Air
Recirculation Flow
HP Ground
EEnnggiinnee Connection AAPPUU EEnnggiinnee
Bleed Air Bleed Air Bleed Air
25
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
HEPA technology for entire fleet since 1994
A300/A310 Family EU 9 HEPA H13
A320 Family HEPA H13
A330/A340 Family EU 9 HEPA H13
H13 + Odour filtration
A380 Odour filtration HEPA H13
pioneered by Airbus
and Pall in 1998
1979 1988 1993 1994 1998 2008
Optional activated carbon layer in recirc
filter as gaseous filter, developed
by Airbus and Pall for long range aircraft in 1998.
Pall is one of the major filter suppliers for Airbus aircraft.
HEPA: High Efficiency Particle Arrestor
H13: HEPA classification (> 99.95% removal) according to European Norm EN1822
EU9: Filter classification (> 95% removal) according to European Norm EN779 05
tsaf
Simplified scheme of Ozone Conversion (OZC)
and combined Ozone/VOC Conversion (VOZC)
Figure 4
Flow Flow
O2
O3 O2
OZC: ozone Converter
O3 O2
VOC: Volatile organic Compound
VOZC: VoC/ozone Converter O2
O2 catalytic
CO2: Car
O
b
O
o
2
n
3
:
:
o
d
o
x
io
y
z
x
g
o
id
n
en
e
e
CmHnOk O2
CO2
CO2
surface
cata
O
ly
Z
s
C
t
H2O: Water
CmHnOx: Simplified molecular H2O
O3
formular for organic compounds
VOZC
consisting of Carbon (C),
catalytic catalyst
Hydrogen (H)
surface
and oxygen (o) atoms
Since 1988 on Airbus single
Filtration technology installed on Airbus aircraft for re-circulated cabin air
aisle aircraft and since 1994 for
Figure 5 the entire fleet (see figure 5),
Airbus installs HEPA (High
Efficiency Particle Air) H13
filters for the re-circulated air
providing more than 99.95%
filtration efficiency (for 0.3
micrometer particles as most
penetrating particle size).
Bacteria and viruses are
effectively removed by these
filters and hence, cannot be
distributed by the ventilation
system.
Sustainment of
cabin air quality
Within the aircraft, air supply
system areas with high
temperatures are most critical
with regards to air quality
because high temperatures lead
to evaporation and possibly
to the breakdown of organic
substances, in case these
find their way into the high
temperature areas.
26
05
tsaf
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
Consequently, special care needs to These analytical capabilities were
be taken to avoid any contamination also used to tackle problems that
with materials susceptible to could occur during production
evaporation or deterioration in this flights, which are conducted for
area during design, manufacturing each aircraft prior to delivery
and operation of the aircraft. by Airbus. Any contamination
A top priority is clean air supply, introduced during manufacturing
starting with the sources of will become apparent when the
pressurized air for the aircraft aircraft air supply system is
ventilation, engines, APUs and operated as a whole, and some
air conditioning systems. Since parts of the bleed air system are
the 1990’s, Airbus has defined subjected to the highest operational
additional requirements for temperatures for the first time.
bleed air cleanness on top of Recently a sophisticated meas-
the requirements used for the urement system was planned and
certification of engines and installed on several A330/A340
APUs by the authorities. Airbus Family aircraft, consisting of a
is promoting and supporting unique online mass spectrometer
international research projects (Ionicon PTR TOF-MS 8000) and
and working groups, to acquire a multifunctional sampling system
independent external expertise and (Fraunhofer IBP) to elucidate the
scientific knowledge by promoting origin of a particular smell that
best standards for an ideal cabin occurred during production flights
environment and its verification. only. The online mass spectrom-
Airbus is also involved during eter used is a unique combination
the validation of the verification of a Proton Transfer Reaction
strategy with APU and engine (PTR) ionisation method with a
manufacturers, while supporting Time Of Flight-Mass Spectrometer
with its own measurements. (TOF-MS) as detailed in figure 6.
Currently, a number of air quality
measurements are conducted on
the A380 flying test bed for the
new A350XWB (Extra Wide
Body) Trent engine. Simplified scheme of the proton transfer reaction and longitudinal
section through the Ionicon PTR TOF-Mass Spectrometer
Figure 6
H2O: Water
H+: Protonated Hydrogen.
ID: Inner Diameter
M: Molecule of interest
NO: Nitrogen oxide
02: oxygen
PTR: Proton Transfer Reaction
Sampling air inlet capillary (1mm ID) TOF-MS: Time of Flight-Mass Spectrometer
M + H O.H+ M.H+ + H O
2 2
All molecules M with higher proton affinity
than water will be charged by PTR
and can be analyzed as M.H+
27
cabin air quality: the key to a comFortable Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
3
Manual
air in
sample
start
flexible pipe start
MFC
TVOC P. T.
CO CO2
(PID) R H.
MFC online sensors
MFC measurement data
MFC
sampler box internal data logger
pump instrument control internal software
Interface
for data
transmision
05
tsaf
Installation of the PTR TOF-MS 8000 mass spectrometer on an A330 aircraft. The instrument weight is 200kg
and the dimensions are comparable to a middle-sized refrigerator.
Figure 7
1 2
4
Scheme of sampling trolley with sensors and sampling tubes connected to a vacuum system. The flow through the
sampling tubes is controlled by mass flow controllers and initiated by pressing a push button located in the cockpit.
Figure 8
The automated and self sustaining
sampling system developed by
Fraunhofer Institute for Building
Physics (Fraunhofer IBP) consists
of two trolleys and can be installed
in galley compartments (see
figures 7, 8 and 9). The trolleys
contain up to 36 sampling tubes
tailored for different compound
classes and several sensors (e.g.
for carbon monoxide and carbon
dioxide).
MFC: Mass Flow Controller - TVOC: Total Volatile organic Compounds
CO: Carbon monoxide - CO2: Carbon dioxide - P: Pressure
T: Temperature - R H: Relative Humidity
28
05
tsaf
cabin air quality: the key to a convenient Flight - HoW To MAKE AN AIRCRAFT BREATHE
With this analytical system, a
Installation of dedicated sampling trolleys in the A330/A340 Family aircraft galley area.
marker substance and finally the
The sampling hose is rooted to the cockpit and positioned at the fourth occupant seat.
root cause for the smell could
be identified unambiguously, Figure 9
based on the results of air
quality measurements on the
Trolley with
aircraft during flight (figure 10).
cartridges
Knowing the precise root cause
and having clear evidence at
Trolley with
hand, corrective actions could be pumps and
implemented at the supplier which sensors
is manufacturing the component
responsible for the smell, and will Sampling hose
be further followed-up.
Concentration of a marker substance indicating a particular smell in comparison with concentrations of a usual VOC spectrum
Figure 10
1 Pronounced component
significantly higher
concentrated than VOC
background
2
2 Smell event
1
CONTACT DETAILS
Dr. Andreas BEZOLD
Environmental Control Systems
Air Quality
Airbus operations
Tel: +49 (0)40 7436 9174
Fax: +49 (0)40 7437 3787
andreas.bezold@airbus.com
Conclusion
Analytical methods will be further to the cabin during flight is very clean
improved and new sophisticated analytical under normal operating conditions,
tools are continuously scrutinized and since the technical and environmental
to simplify measurements with the repercussions, as well as safety
long-term objective to perform a complete implications of installing such system into
analysis of the cabin air at the push of a highly optimized aircraft environment
a button. Yet this objective of having may be severe, the introduction of such
a Star Trek-like device is still out of reach technologies needs to be thoroughly
for years, if not decades. However, justified. The impact on safety, crew
it is a tempting idea to combine and passenger comfort, and on
sophisticated measurement technologies side-effects on the environment, need
with established databases of contaminant to be carefully weighed to evaluate
patterns, in order to revolutionize whether an added value for our society
troubleshooting and aircraft system can be created. Rational decisions
monitoring. Airbus continuously reviews in design and operation of aircraft are key
whether any air filtration or cleaning to safe air travel. Considering that civil
technology could add any value to the aviation is still the safest mode of public
passengers, crews and aircraft operations. transportation, this basic principle seems
However, since the air provided to work well so far. Let’s take a fresh deep
breath!
29
space-Flex - AN INNoVATIVE CABIN oPTIoN FoR THE A320 FAMILy
05
tsaf
Space-Flex
An innovative cabin option
for the A320 Family
Every airline is concerned in providing comfort making more efficient use of the volume at the
and the best level of service to its passengers, rear of the cabin with a lavatory accessible to
while generating more revenue seats. Persons with Reduced Mobility (PRM).
Airbus has launched an innovative cabin option The PRM-friendly lavatory is facilitated via a
for the A320 Family fleet, named Space-Flex. simple conversion process.
This option, with first deliveries due in 2013, In this article, you will find some of its features
frees space for more revenue-generating seats and you will already have an idea on how it will
by reconfiguring the rear of the aircraft, and by benefit Airbus operators.
Stefanie von LINSTOW
Aircraft Interiors Marketing Manager
Airbus operations
30
05
tsaf
space-Flex - AN INNoVATIVE CABIN oPTIoN FoR THE A320 FAMILy
Increase your By making more efficient use of the
volume at the rear of the cabin, two
cabin comfort and i n f o r m a t i o n
lavatories plus a galley can now
increase revenue be efficiently accommodated in With an order from TAM Airlines,
this space, providing the following Airbus has officially launched
advantages: the Space-Flex PRM (Persons
Market feedback from Airbus
• Freeing-up space for, typically, with Reduced Mobility) lavatory
customers on the Space-Flex as an option for A320 Family
three to six more revenue-
concept revealed in 2011 during operators.
generating passenger seats
cabin interior exhibitions has been TAM Airlines will become the first
and/or an improvement in the
very positive, not only due to Airbus customer to benefit from
seat pitch throughout the cabin,
the unique revenue and comfort Space-Flex, creating more comfort
• Offering two lavatories, each for its passengers. TAM Airline's
benefits, but also by optimizing the
of comparable size to the newly equipped aircraft with
cabin layout.
existing A320’s (i.e.: Larger Space-Flex will be delivered
than the competitors’ lavatories), as from the fourth quarter of 2013.
Airbus has therefore decided to
• Providing one of the lavatories
launch Space-Flex as an option on
with a full access for ‘Persons
the A320 Family aircraft.
with Reduced Mobility’
(PRM) where a wheelchair can
conveniently be manoeuvred,
for the first time in a single-aisle
aircraft.
Current A320 rear configuration
Current A320 rear configuration
versus the Space-Flex option
Space-Flex option
Gain of three seats
Use currently unused cabin space
PRM lavatory
Increased cabin comfort
31
title title - SUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE SUB-TITLE
05
tsaf
space-Flex - AN INNoVATIVE CABIN oPTIoN FoR THE A320 FAMILy
32
05
tsaf
A320 high density layout - 180 passengers
2299”” 3239”” 2299”” 2288”” High density layout with better comfort
2299”” 3333”” 3303””
With Space-Flex:
PRM lavatory
Identical forward cabin Improved comfort, no seats at 28” pitch
The two different Space-Flex The ‘PRM-friendly’ lavatory is
variants include a: facilitated via a simple conversion
• Lavatory only configuration: process: Two single Space-Flex
Space-Flex PRM lavatory Comprises a lateral and a centre lavatories (or the one lavatory
conversion process
lavatory separated by a rigid and urinal configuration) are
wall which can be deployed convertible into one Space-Flex
at your convenience, as well PRM enclosure in a similar manner
as a corresponding Space-Flex to those delivered on the Airbus
galley. wide-body aircraft. During the
• Lavatory with a urinal concept development, Airbus
configuration: conducted tests with European and
With a lateral lavatory and North American experts, inviting
a centre urinal, separated wheelchair users to make sure
by a moveable rigid wall. that the lavatory was designed to
The corresponding Space-Flex the reach the needs of the PRM
galley option offers users. Thanks to this and after
a higher capacity than the first having reviewed several criteria,
variant, and the urinal can bring some un-adapted elements have
advantages for a better hygiene been detected and immediately
and the passengers’ satisfaction. improved. The resulting design is
available today with Space-Flex.
Basic and optional lavatory Airlines choosing the Space-Flex
equipment remain the same as option will be in line with the U.S.
on the existing A320 Family PRM lavatory recommendation,
lavatories. and any PRM lavatory regulation
Additional galleys with different that will be mandated in the future.
capacities, on the right hand
side before the aft door, can be The entry-into-service is foreseen
selected. In this particular case, in autumn 2013.
an airline would gain three
additional revenue-generating The retrofit aspect of any innovation
passenger seats. However, without has to be taken into consideration
any galley installed before ‘Door to maximize the aircraft operators’
4’, the seat gain could even be benefits. Space-Flex will also be
of at least six additional seats. available for retrofit.
The total seat count, of course,
must always remain within the
existing exit limit.
32
33
05
tsaf
space-Flex - AN INNoVATIVE CABIN oPTIoN FoR THE A320 FAMILy
Space-Flex improves
the passengers' comfort
A320 high density layout - 180 passengers
2299”” 3239”” 2299”” 2288”” High density layout with better comfort
2299”” 3333”” 3303””
With Space-Flex:
PRM lavatory
Identical forward cabin Improved comfort, no seats at 28” pitch
Operators will then be able to and Airbus Upgrade Services
harmonize their A320 Family fleets is already working with several
and get the maximum benefits of major customers who envisage the
Space-Flex. Whether the customers retrofit of Space-Flex in their A320
want to install additional revenue Family fleets.
seats, add legroom by improving
the seat pitch in their cabin, or The Service Bulletin (SB) and the
simply comply with the PRM kits to embody the solution will be
recommendations, Space-Flex is available two to three months after
the answer. the Space-Flex introduction on the
first production aircraft.
Today, more than 3,700 A320
Family aircraft could be retrofitted The Airbus Upgrade Key Account
with this solution. The concept has Managers will be able to give you
obtained a tremendous success with more information regarding the
the majority of Airbus customers integration of Space-Flex in your
during the different exhibitions, current in service fleet.
CONTACT DETAILS
Stefanie von LINSTOW
Aircraft Interiors
Marketing Manager
Airbus operations
Tel: +49 (0)40 7435 5146
stefanie.von-linstow@airbus.com
Conclusion
Space-Flex is an innovative A320 Family This convenient concept, shown
option maximizing the cabin revenue space, in several aircraft cabin interior exhibitions,
and is equipped with lavatories accessible has already found the interest of many
to Persons with Reduced Mobility (PRM). operators which either, desire to add more
The entry-into-service will occur during revenue-generating passenger seats, wish
the 4th quarter of 2013 and will be proposed to improve the seat pitch layout and want
as a retrofit for the A320 Family aircraft. to offer the PRM-friendly lavatory for their
passengers' satisfaction.
33
30
100
passenger comFort - IMPRoVING AIR QUALITy IN CABINS
05 tsaf
-“Hello everyone, Although they valued and you can read all
this is your Captain the cozy cabins in the details in this FAST
speaking. We welcome the past, they all would magazine at page 22.
you on-board this appreciate that most
Fw 200 Condor flight of the worldwide Take a fresh deep breath
to New York City! passenger commercial and enjoy your flight
We wish you a pleasant flights nowadays are on Airbus aircraft!
flight and don’t non-smokers.
hesitate to ask our
attendant if you would Airbus has even taken
like refreshments, a step forward
newspapers, the latest in cabin air quality
FAST magazine, or for the comfort of the
an ashtray. operators’ passengers,
- A
a
s
n
h t
a
r
s
a
h
y
t
?
r a
D
y
i
?
d
! !!
h
”
e say T
F w e
h
e w a q
e
n s u g 2 i
F
i 0 a p
o
n 0 p
c
e G e
k
s C e d
e
o r
-
t n m w
W
h d a i
u
a o n t
l
t r h
f
a e i f n r o t c u e r r r a e f d t
s a I c e s I t a a y r e T c t t f n r e a v p h T o h i w t o o r a n i a e h m fi e n a e n f y r d c r e m r s r - i e a F e s fi 1 s 2 n o N t w p r t r 9 c j t 7 g f e a e r c s 4 a u o 6 w s d 2 o i fl t 4 p s p 2 d 0 d a e a t a 5 e Y i 0 u l w a w b b i v o n c i i l l e r e r C t a i r t e e t c p l k t o i i n p h s w r a o w n o r l o s e a s p C o d n c J a a f e f s m i o r u n t n t e e t c r e a l e t h n n y a n f y o a B g t . b w d t t t n e e . i a e . 1 o a r r n s d 9 l o l s s 3 fl n i , . 7 y e n
produced.
34
egatireH
etaroproC
SDAE
fo
ysetruoC
Customer Services
events
Just happened Technical Data Support & Services symposium
This symposium will be held in Istanbul
A successful A330/A340 Family symposium (Turkey) from 20th to 22nd November 2012.
This symposium took place in Bangkok It will be focused on technical data related
(Thailand) last June. During the three days, to maintenance & repair, spares & suppliers,
the symposium mainly focused on the fleet’s Service Bulletins (SB) and flight operations.
performance optimisation with 34 Airbus The targeted population is all tech data users
specialists who have provided presentations from engineering and maintenance departments
on actual in-service issues affecting the A330/ from airlines, MROs and a panel of suppliers
A340 Family fleet, as well as some subjects of which are also invited.
more general interest. This event provides a comprehensive view on
This year’s symposium gathered not the current status of Airbus Technical Data,
less than 54 airlines, 20 vendors and six including planned improvements and future
MROs (Maintenance Repair and Overhaul) developments for all Airbus aircraft families.
organisations, representing a total of 174 For more information, please contact:
participants. miguel.coto@airbus.com.
A380 symposium in Dubai
Coming soon
More than 150 participants are expected to
participate to the upcoming A380 symposium
Airbus Lessors Conference which will be held in Dubai (United Arab
This next conference will be held in Santa Emirates) from 3rd to 6th December 2012.
Monica, California (U.S.A.) from the The symposium will focus on fleet-wide A380
9th through 11th October 2012. subjects, operational reliability, maintenance
The agenda will focus on many important and flight operations. The invitations have
technical and future development subjects for been sent out in July to all the A380 customers.
Airbus aircraft. If you haven’t received the
invitations and agenda, please contact your Announcing the 11th Airbus Training
Customer Support Director. symposium
Two years after the previous successful
Material Matters - Airbus Material, Logistics, symposium which gathered over 375 delegates
Suppliers and Warranty symposium from more than 100 operators, Airbus Training
The invitations have been sent out for this organizes the 11th Training symposium in
symposium to be held in Bangkok (Thailand) Dubai (United Arab Emirates) from 10th to
from the 22nd to 24th October 2012. Airbus 13th December 2012.
will share with their worldwide customers If you haven't received the 'Save the Date'
and major suppliers the latest developments notification sent out in July, please contact
and initiatives taken on lifetime support and your Customer Support Director.
first-class innovative services.
For registration, please use the link provided in
the invitation you have received.
05
tsaf
35
All the FAST magazines
are available free-of-access on: WWW.AIRBUS.CoM/SUPPoRT/PUBLICATIoNS
Have fun and test your knowledge
by answering this small quiz!
For AirbusWorld users, log-on to
AirbusWorld/What's new/
News, events and publications
and answer the quiz online
to try to win one of the
50 Airbus giveaways!
FAST magazine quiz
10 questions - 1 possible answer
The answers will be provided in the next FAST magazine edition.
1) When was the first FAST magazine published? 6) Which system on Airbus aircraft provides protection
(clue in FAST 1) against fuel tank fire and explosion? (clue in FAST 44)
A. 1979 A. Fuel Tank Extinguishing System (FTES)
B. 1983 B. Fire and Explosion Prevention System (FEPS)
C. 1989 C. Fuel Tank Inerting System (FTIS)
D. 1995 D. Fuel Valve Bypass System (FVBS)
2) What is the wing span of an A310? (clue in FAST 5) 7) What happened on 1 February, 2008? (clue in FAST 46)
A. 41.5 m A. A irbus completed a flight non-stop around the world
B. 42.1 m with an A380
C. 43.9 m B. A irbus completed the world’s first ever flight by
D. 44.6 m a commercial jet (A380) using synthetic liquid
jet-fuel made from natural gas (GTL)
3) What is the advantage of the Airbus Fly-By-Wire C. A irbus launched its new A350XWB programme
system? (clue in FAST 9) D. A irbus sold its 5,000th A320 Family aircraft
A. It saves weight
B. It reduces complexity 8) What is the name of the tool especially developed by
the Airbus Structures Test Domain for the A320 impact
C. It increases the aircraft reliability
calibration campaign, which is now used for the impact
D. All of the above answers are correct
threat evaluation for the A350XWB composite fuselage?
(clue in FAST 48)
4) I am an engineering tool used to design, integrate,
optimize and validate vital aircraft systems such as A. MICKEY
the Electrical Generation, Hydraulic Generation, Flight B. RATATOUILLE
Control System, Auto-Flight System, Warning System C. YOGI
(ECAM) and the Centralized Fault and Maintenance
D. GUISMOT
System. What am I? (clue in FAST 24)
A. The Test Bed 9) The radio altimeter is used to provide an accurate
B. The Iron Bird height above ground level when the aircraft is between?
C. The Flying Prototype (clue in FAST 49)
D. The Virtual Fly Test A. 0 and 1,000 feet
B. 0 and 2,000 feet
5) Airbus received acceptance of the A380 Maintenance C. 0 and 2,500 feet
Review Board Report (MRBR) from the European
D. 0 and 3,000 feet
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) on which date?
(clue in FAST 38)
10) What is called the innovative cabin option for the
A. 23 December 2005 A320 Family aircraft? (clue in FAST 50)
B. 17 September 2006
A. Space-Flex
C. 12 November 2007
B. Spice-Flex
D. 4 July 2008
C. Space-Flux
D. Spice-Flux
Your feedback is a gift to help us always improve FAST magazine.
Please don’t hesitate to contact us with your comments at fast.magazine@airbus.com
05
tsaf
36
05
tsaf
CUSTOMER SERVICES WORLDWIDE AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
Bangalore
WorldWIdE
Services and Customer Support
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 1980
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 1818
USA/CANAdA
Customer Services
Tel: +1 703 834 3484
Fax: +1 703 834 3464
CHINA
Customer Services
Services and Customer Support centres
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020 Training centres
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162 Material Logistics centres / Regional warehouses
Field Service Managers
FIEld SErVICE SUPPorT AdMINISTrATIoN
Field Service Management
Country Field Service location Country Field Service location
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 0413
Algeria Algiers Malaysia Kuala Lumpur
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964
Argentina Buenos Aires Mauritius Mauritius
TECHNICAl, MATErIAl logISTICS Australia Brisbane Mexico Toluca
Melbourne Mongolia Ulaanbaatar
& TrAININg SUPPorT
Newcastle Morocco Casablanca
Airbus has its main Material Logistics centre
Sydney Netherlands Amsterdam
in Hamburg and regional warehouses Bahrain Manama New Zealand Auckland
in Frankfurt, Washington D.C., Dubai, Beijing Bangladesh Dhaka Nigeria Lagos
and Singapore. Brazil Sao Paulo Oman Muscat
Canada Montreal Pakistan Karachi
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Chile Santiago Peru Lima
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 China Beijing Philippines Manilla
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 3500 Chengdu Portugal Lisbon
airtac@airbus.com Chongqing Qatar Doha
Guangzhou Romania Bucharest
Spares AOG/Work Stoppage Haikou Russia Moscow
• O utside the Americas: Hangzhou Saudi Arabia Jeddah
Hong Kong Riyadh
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001
Shanghai Singapore Singapore City
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011
Shenyang South Africa Johannesburg
aog.spares@airbus.com Shenzhen Spain Barcelona
• I n the Americas: Xi’an Madrid
Tel: +1 70 3729 9000 Colombia Bogota Sri Lanka Colombo
Fax: +1 70 3729 4373 Colombia Switzerland Zurich
Czech Republic Prague Taiwan Taipei
aog.na@airbus.com
Ecuador Quito Thailand Bangkok
Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas: Egypt Cairo Tunisia Tunis
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002 El Salvador San Salvador Turkey Istanbul
Faroe Islands Torshavn United Arab Emirates Abu Dhabi
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
Finland Helsinki Dubai
ifd.spares@airbus.com France Paris Sharjah
Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas: Germany Berlin United Kingdom Derby
Cologne London
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003
Dusseldorf Luton
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013 Frankfurt Manchester
hmv.spares@airbus.com Greece Athens United States of America Atlanta
Hungary Budapest Charlotte
Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
India Mumbai Chicago
Please contact your dedicated customer spares New Delhi Fort Lauderdale
account representative Indonesia Jakarta Herndon
csr.na@airbus.com Iran Tehran Honolulu
Irish Republic Dublin Houston
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Italy Rome Indianapolis
Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3333 Japan Kita Kyushu Los Angeles
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094 Osaka Louisville
Tokyo Memphis
Airbus Maintenance Training Centre Jordan Amman Miami
Hamburg, Germany Kazakhstan Almaty New York
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288 Korea Republic Seoul Phoenix
Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8588 Kuwait Kuwait City San Francisco
Laos Vientiane Tulsa
Airbus Training subsidiaries Lebanon Beirut Washington, D.C.
Miami, Florida - U.S.A. Libya Tripoli Uzbekistan Tashkent
Tel: +1 305 871 3655 Luxembourg Luxembourg City Vietnam Hanoi
Fax: +1 305 871 4649 Ho Chi Minh
37
Higher load factors. Lower costs. When will your revenues profi t from the A380?
.skramedart
deretsiger
era
seman
tcudorp
eht
dna
ogol
sti
,subriA
Operators love the aircraft that passengers love to fl y.
A 380
lovea380.com Airbus . Love at fi rst fl ight.
10913171.10584_AIR_Farn_Plane_FAST_297x210.indd 1 27/06/2012 14:38
