Airbus technical magazine
August 2015
#56
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
242555###TTTSSSAAAFFF
222000
Your Airbus technical magazine is now on tablet
The articles in this magazine appear in 2015 QTR-2 and QTR-3
iOS (iPad) & Android
65#TSAF
30
Airbus technical magazine
#56
FA S T
Flight Airworthiness Support Technology
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD
Stealthy building panels 04
Design: Daren BIRCHALL
Cover: Livery painting
Photo by: A. Tchaikovski
Printer: Amadio Head-Up
12
Authorisation for reprinting FAST magazine Display system
articles should be requested from the editor
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Airline liveries 18
FAST magazine is available on internet
www.airbus.com/support/publications
and on tablets
Managing airframe
ISSN 1293-5476 26
aerodynamic performance
© AIRBUS 2015
Taking lithium-ion technology
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
32
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter ‘Magazine’), you accept on behalf to new heights
of your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted
by the delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of
information. This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified
nor reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive FAST from the past 38
or other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information
involves a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus can be
We’ve got it covered 39
contacted to provide further details. Airbus shall assume no liability for
any damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains,
even if Airbus has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence
is governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals
of Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of
competent jurisdiction. Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
Where you see these icons,
Photo copyright Airbus videos or slide shows are available
Photo credits: Airbus Photographic Library, Airbus Flight Test Lab, on the tablet app versions
Airbus Group Corporate Heritage, Master Films, EXM company, Getty Images, Philippe Masclet, of FAST magazine.
Hervé Gousse, Frédéric Lancelot, A. Doumenjou. A. Tchaikovski, Marc de Tienda
25#TSAF
20
Your Airbus technical magazine is now on tablet
iOS (iPad) & Android
65#TSAF
40
Stealthy
building panels
Eliminating unwanted reflection
of the Instrument Landing System signals
The new Airbus stealthy facade technology allows
buildings to be constructed closer to airport runways
without compromising aircraft safety. The facade panels
allow constructions to be built in the vicinity of the airport
landside area by cancelling ILS signal reflections likely
to disturb an aircraft’s approach and landing.
Article by (left to right) Airports: attractive areas for building development
Alexandre HERVE Any frequent air traveller will have noticed that there are an increasingly varied range
Research engineer of activities that take place within airport premises and surroundings. Indeed they
Airbus Group Innovations are becoming mini-cities in their own right. Several buildings are required for airport
Electromagnetism department operations such as air terminals themselves, of course, but many other satellite
Alexandre.Herve@airbus.com businesses and car parks. Developers recognize the importance of building hotels
and exhibition centres at such important transport hubs, which are also frequently
Laurent EVAIN well connected to city centres. It is also particularly important for aircraft manufacturers
Simulation product manager such as Airbus, to install their premises close to runways to facilitate aircraft tests
Airbus ProSky and deliveries.
Laurent.Evain@airbusprosky.com
65#TSAF
50
Stealthy building panels
And yet, despite this pressure to develop airports, they remain remarkably underdeveloped. Try the experiment yourself
using Google Earth: navigate to any major city and its airport is immediately visible due to the large amount of unexploited
land in its proximity. There are two main reasons for this:
• Firstly, there is an area very close to the runways, known as the Obstacle Limitation Surface (OLS), whose role is to
prevent aircraft colliding into buildings. This area will always remain undeveloped.
But, beyond this zone is a large area that
would be exploitable but carries the risk
of interfering with aircraft landing
systems. 90 Hz
• The Instrument Landing System signal
which provides guidance in the vertical 90 Hz
and horizontal planes by emitting a
signal with a spatially varying modula- LOC
antenna
tion (following the vertical and horizon-
tal position of the aircraft). If the aircraft LOC
approaches to the left of the runway, it antenna
receives a signal with a stronger 90 Hz
component and if it is towards the
150 Hz
right, it will then receive a stronger
150 Hz component. By comparing the
relative ‘weights’ of the two compo- 150 Hz
nents (the Difference of Depth of
Modulation - DDM) one has a measure 90 Hz
of the deviation from the runway axis,
and it is this value that is displayed in
90 Hz
the cockpit. This is the operation of the
GLIDE
localizer (LOC) antenna. The same
antenna
principles hold in the vertical plane for 150 Hz
the glide slope antenna. GLIDE
If obstacles are present in the vicinity antenna
150 Hz
of the runway, the ILS can provide
unwanted multipath signals that
provide a non-zero DDM, even when
one is on the runway axis.
Received signal
= direct + multipath
Received signal
= direct + multipath
Direct signal
multipath signal
Direct signal
multipath signal
ILS antenna
ILS antenna
65#TSAF
60
Stealthy building panels
Airbus faced this problem in 2012 when planning to construct a new hangar on the Toulouse (France) site. The building was
expected to be a continuation of a corridor linking several other hangars. This made perfect industrial sense but unfortunately,
it brought the building within 380 metres of the runway centre-line of Toulouse International Airport.
Simulations performed with the Airbus in-house ILS prediction tool, Exact Landing Interference Simulation Environment (ELISE
Consulting Services in FAST#49), indicated that the building would produce ILS perturbations of 15 μA (microampere) which are far
in excess of the ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) regulatory limits set at 7.2 μA. Construction permission was refused
by the French civil aviation authorities (DGAC) until a solution could be found. For this reason, the Airbus Facility Management and
the Airport Operation departments turned to Airbus Group Innovations (AGI) Electromagnetism department for a technical solution.
Stealthy building solutions’ development
Although stealth is a very mature subject, having benefited from several decades
of studies from numerous research groups, the subject of stealthy buildings for radio
navigation applications presents an interesting challenge, mainly because the
constraints are different to those of military applications. To list just a few:
• Cost is the major constraint for stealthy building applications, because of the large
surface area of building facades and because the solution should not represent
a significant fraction of the total cost of the building.
• For a solution to be implemented on a building, it should preferentially use materials
that are commonly used in the building industry. Indeed, most architects insist that
a material be accompanied by a 10 year guarantee and an installation manual.
This precludes the use of several conventional stealth materials.
• Many of the aircraft navigation systems operate in the VHF (Very High Frequency)
band, where stealth materials frequently do not excel. They are often either thick
(as in the case of foam) or expensive (as in the case of ceramic).
• The building is a cooperative target: The position of both, the source of radio waves
and the building, are fixed. The frequency band is usually fixed and is of limited
extent. Wide-band or wide-angle solutions are therefore not required.
• It is usually only necessary to redirect the scattered radiation in a selected direction
rather than absorb it.
For the construction of its new hangar Airbus chose to redirect radiation with a
diffraction grating rather than a system that would absorb incoming radiation.
16
12
8
4
0
)Aµ(
MDD
1. Before construction
Peaks due to existing
ICAO limit airport buildings
Localizer signal
2. Before installation of stealth solution
16
12
8
4
0
)Aµ(
MDD
New peak due to hangar
double the ICAO limits
3. After the installation of stealth solution
16
12
8
4
0
)Aµ(
MDD
DDM: Difference of Depth
of Modulation
Peak due to hangar almost
μA: microampere disappears in the noise
65#TSAF
70
Stealthy building panels
In the photo above we see the installed Stealthy panels produce destructive interference
stealthy solution. Although it proved to be
very effective, some shortcomings were
Peaks from one source arrive
identified with this solution: at the same time as troughs from another
• Its striking appearance makes it unsuitable
for non-industrial structures such as hotels
and exhibition centres, + = The sum of the waves
produces a zero field
• It overhangs the building facade by 70 cm
and requires a steel reinforcement
structure,
• It cannot be applied to an existing building. An interesting side effect of diffraction grating is that waves add constructively
at the angle of incidence, so a signal is redirected back to where it comes from.
Airbus therefore identified the need for a thin,
lightweight, aesthetic alternative.
Fig. 1 shows a classic facade that sends a diffracted field Fig. 2 shows customized stealthy panels that send
towards the runway causing interference on the runway a diffracted field back to the localizer (LOC) antenna,
creating no interference on the runway
Fig. 1 Fig. 2
ILS antenna ILS antenna
65#TSAF
80
Thin diffraction grating
Anti-phase is created
due to the resonant
structure
Currents are in different directions
on the resonant structures and on the surface
Creating a resonant circuit
C
R
L
C
=
L
R
Design optimisation to produce exact structure
Stealthy building panels
Thick versus thin diffraction
Thick diffraction grating
grating reflections
Anti-phase is created
due to the periodic
structure
In the case of the thick diffraction grating, destructive
interference is generated by a path difference. This does
not appear possible with a thin solution. Indeed, with the
thin solution, we introduce a phase change directly on
the surface currents of the building façade. To do so, we
implement a form of electronic circuit, but rather than
attaching individual electronic components to the
building, we form our circuit by carefully folding metallic
panels with precise dimensions. By doing so, we create
a gap that acts as a capacitor and a loop that acts as an Electromagnetic optimisation
inductor. Together, they form a resonant circuit much like
those in a simple radio receiver. It is this circuit that can 2636
h 2.5
be tuned to the frequency of the ILS signal and provide w
the appropriate cancellation.
2.0 365
Tune element shape to
cancel reflected wave.
1.5
50
Parametric study
1
performed by Airbus’
Innovation Group using 7
0.5
electromagnetism
simulation tools.
0 0.98
1 1.5 2 2.5 3
)m(
thgieh
h
noitcuder
langiS
Signal reduction factor along Ɵ = 25°
Thick diffraction grating
65#TSAF
90
Stealthy building panels
Thin diffraction grating
Through extensive simulations, we were able to establish that thin
diffraction grating could produce large signal attenuations.
Anti-phase is created
We also came to the conclusion that heavy rain could have an due to the resonant
effect on the solution if we did not take appropriate precautions. structure
This is not, as one might think, because the rain creates
‘short-circuits’ in our resonant structures, but is due to the fact
that when there is a large quantity of water close to a capacitor,
it can change the value of its capacitance. For this reason, Airbus
designed a protective screen to preserve a distance between the
capacitor and the rain-layer.
Currents are in different directions
Before trying this new technology on an existing building, Airbus on the resonant structures and on the surface
decided that it would be better to perform tests on a full-scale
prototype. To do so, Airbus collaborated with the French civil
Creating a resonant circuit
aviation authorities (DGAC) who possess a fully functioning ILS
antenna at the small aerodrome: Cahors-Lalbenque (France). C
R
This technology, initially imagined by the Electromagnetism
department of Airbus Group Innovations, was validated in 2014
L
on a prototype at the Cahors airfield, thanks to the support of the
Airbus Business Nursery (now named Airbus BizLab), and is
C
currently being commercialized by Airbus through its 100% ATM
=
subsidiary: Airbus ProSky. L
R
Design optimisation to produce exact structure
Thick diffraction grating
Anti-phase is created
due to the periodic
structure
Electromagnetic optimisation
2636
h 2.5
w
2.0 365
Tune element shape to
cancel reflected wave.
1.5
50
Parametric study
1
performed by Airbus’
Innovation Group using 7
0.5
electromagnetism
simulation tools.
0 0.98
1 1.5 2 2.5 3
)m(
thgieh
h
noitcuder
langiS
Thin diffraction grating
Signal reduction factor along Ɵ = 25°
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
108.0 108.5 109.0 109.5 110.0 110.5 111.0 111.5 112.0
150
100
50
0
-50
-100
-150
150
100
50
0
-50
-100
-150
150
100
50
0
-50
-100
-150
300 400 500
Position along the runway (m)
noitcuder
lanoitcarF
)Aµ(
noitabrutreP
Test facade (30 x 5 metres, 12.5° with regards to runway)
Measured thin stealthy solution (wet)
Measured thin stealthy solution (dry)
Hill
Simulation
Wooded External rays
area
183 m
Trajectory
25.9° 23.5° of test vehicle
376 m
ILS antenna
12 Elements Extent of
perturbation
Aperture = 26 m
Frequency (MHz)
No facade
Normal facade
Dry diffraction grating
compared to normal facade
Interference reduced by 91 %
150
Wet diffraction grating
100
compared to normal facade
50
0
-50
Interference still reduced by 90 %
-100
-150
600 700
65#TSAF
01
Stealthy building panels
Thin diffraction grating tests being carried out
at Cahors (France) airport
A panel measuring 30 x 5 metres was
installed upon a nearby hill to maximize
its reflected signal. To avoid creating a
hazard to the other users of the aero-
drome, it was necessary to adopt the
regulatory colours of red and white and
to install solar powered beacons.
The results of the measurement
campaign
The first curve shows the reference
signal, before the façade was
installed. The oscillations present are
due to the surrounding environment
such as the hill upon which the
façade was mounted.
The red curve displays the signal
when a planar façade was installed.
A very significant perturbation of
262 μA peak to peak was observed.
Then, once the thin diffraction grating
was installed (orange curve), this
perturbation decreased by 91% (we
estimated that an 80% reduction is
sufficient for almost all applications).
Finally, the blue curve displays the
effect of a water layer. There are
almost no changes when compared
to the dry test.
CONCLUSION
Airbus’ stealthy panels proved to be efficient in the reduction of unwanted
disturbances of Instrument Landing System signals due to building facades.
The thinner of the two technologies suits installation onto existing buildings
as well as new projects. These new panels could resolve known cases of
spurious reflections that disturb ILS and render parcels of land in proximity
to runways constructible.
65#TSAF
11
Stealthy building panels
Stealthy facades
commercialization
Once the technology was validated,
Airbus decided to open the commerciali-
zation of this promising technology
through Airbus ProSky. Airbus ProSky
The building industry is constantly
company overview
innovating in response to new challeng-
es, such as unusual structural geome- Airbus ProSky is a 100 percent Airbus subsidiary dedicated to delivering Air
tries or large “name plates” and stealthy Traffic Management (ATM) performance and transformation. Through its airspace
building panels are another example of design services, air traffic flow management (ATFM), Collaborative Decision
this innovation. This is why Airbus Group Making (CDM) and airport technology, such as ELISE and stealthy technology,
Innovations remains involved in the Airbus ProSky delivers predictability, efficiency, sustainability and capacity to its
dimensioning of optimal solutions on a customers worldwide.
case-by-case basis.
A partner of more than 100 airlines, airports and air navigation service providers
More than 150 airports in the world (ANSPs) worldwide, Airbus ProSky has been delivering these benefits alongside
could be interested in this technology. Metron Aviation since 2011.
Most of them are surrounded by cities
Through the SESAR JU (Single European Sky ATM Research Joint Undertaking)
that have no more expendable building
flight trials – where Airbus ProSky was actively participating in over a dozen
land. This technology would offer them
projects, Airbus ProSky has demonstrated that ATM modernization is an
the possibility to construct buildings
attainable reality.
closer to the runways and to use land
that could not be fully exploited other- A partner of more than 100 airlines, airports and Air Navigation Service Providers
wise. When we consider the price of (ANSPs) worldwide, Airbus ProSky has been delivering these benefits alongside
one square metre in London Heathrow Metron Aviation since 2011.
Airport (UK) or Tokyo Narita Airport
(Japan), it is easy to imagine how this
solution could be very interesting for all
airport stakeholders.
65#TSAF
21
The way forward is clear
Head-Up
Display system
Article by
Hélène da COSTA GOMES The Head-Up Display (HUD) has been available on Airbus aircraft since 2006
HUD Multi-Programme Project Task Leader (see FAST 46).This visual guidance system has been shown to significantly increase
AIRBUS pilots’ situational awareness, particularly during the approach and landing phases by
Helene.Dacosta@airbus.com showing trajectory related symbols superimposed on a transparent screen in the pilot’s
forward-field view. Service experience confirms that the HUD is a very good means
to stabilize the aircraft during the approach phase.
The fully digital processing of the HUD system also offers view enhancement and the
ability to display video images together with symbols. These technologies are being
used concurrently to develop an Enhanced Vision System (EVS) and a Synthetic Vision
System (SVS).
Airbus’ programme to make Head-Up Display technology available to all Airbus
aircraft, has received extra encouragement from recent decisions made by the Civil
Aviation Administration of China (CAAC), requiring that airlines be equipped with at
least one HUD. This decision which applies to Chinese airlines may also affect other
aircraft flying in Chinese airspace.
A growing number of airports are ready to propose specific procedures for aircraft
equipped with Head-Up Display. China’s impressive air traffic growth has pushed the
CAAC to release an implementation roadmap extending to 2025.
During this time frame, airports’ capacities will be assessed, HUD operations will be
normalized and fleets will be updated conforming to the new requirements, operators
will be trained and HUD operations in China normalized.
65#TSAF
31
Head-Up Display
The evolving Airbus HUD offer
Going one step further than the CAAC’s roadmap, Airbus is gradually incorporating
dual HUD into all Airbus aircraft as part of their ‘symmetrical cockpit philosophy.
Beyond this Airbus reviewed the HUD policy to include the following improvements:
A320 Family
A new HUD standard (L5) was certified in February 2015. This standard upgrades the
system to restore compatibility with the latest developments in functions such as:
• Runway Overrun Prevention System (ROPS - see FAST #55)
• Required Navigation Performance Authorisation Required (RNP AR) step 3
(down to 0.1 Nautical Miles)
• Auto-Pilot/Flight Director Traffic alert and Collision Avoidance System (AP/FD TCAS)
• Advisory runway ahead
• Soft go-around
• Reversible Back-Up Speed Scale (BUSS)
Moreover, this standard enables the integration of a dual HUD configuration on single
aisle family aircraft and proposes symbology improvements. The dual HUD configura-
tion has been proposed on single-aisle aircraft (except A321) since March 2015.
By the beginning of 2016, the HUD offer will be extended to the A321 model.
A330 Family
Development was launched in 2013 to certify dual HUD on long range family aircraft.
The long range HUD standard will be based on the latest certified single-aisle standard
and proposes the latest functionalities to keep the highest symbology and operations’
commonality throughout Airbus’ fleet.
A350 Family
HUD was part of the cockpit development from the very beginning; so the HUD is
more integrated in the overhead panel. Space provisions have been enlarged to
provide best head-clearance for pilots. The system has been designed with a new
Liquid-Crystal Display (LCD) technology projector with Light-Emitting Diode (LED)
backlights. HUD software is integrated in the display system.
The A350 already proposes the dual HUD as an option since Entry-Into-Service.
A380
The A380 proposes a dual HUD option in the catalogue. A new standard is being
developed to propose the latest display functionalities.
Head-Up Display
main operational
benefits
• Improved situation awareness
• Better Instrument Meteoro-
logical Conditions (IMC)/
Visual Meteorological
Conditions (VMC) transition
• Enhanced stability of manually
flown approaches
• Reduced take-off minima
• Reduced landing minima
65#TSAF
41
Head-Up Display
Cockpit integration – operational policy
The policy review which standardized the integration of dual Head-Up Display (HUD),
also indicates that the information shown on the Primary Flight Display (PFD) - known as
the Head-Down Display (HDD) - is also developed for the HUD.
Airbus’ HUD is included in the aircraft Type Certificate (TC). It is fully integrated as an
additional display in the avionics suite. The guidance displayed in the HUD are
generated by the flight controls’ computers, which provide all Airbus aircraft with
Auto-Pilot (AP), and Auto-Land (AL) CAT III capability.
Thanks to this architecture with the guidance laws hosted by the flight control
computers, the current Airbus HUD product answers eligibility requirements for
special CAT I and CAT II operations. Airbus’ Flight Operations department supports
airlines for special authorization approvals.
The HUD is fully integrated with the different aircraft systems. Pilots flying a HUD
equipped aircraft must follow a dedicated training course that integrates the HUD
in cockpit operations.
In Airbus’ catalogue, the HUD is a Supplier Furnished Equipment (SFE) option supplied
by Thales.
Dual Head-Up Display is part of Airbus’ symmetrical cockpit philosophy
65#TSAF
51
Head-Up Display
Airports are categorized CAT I, CAT II, CAT III, Special CAT I and Special CAT II, based on their Instrument Landing System.
ICAO (International Civil Aviation Organization) classifies ILS approaches as being in one of the following categories:
Approach Decision Height (DH) Runway Visual Visibility Notes
category or alert height Range (RVR) minimum
(minimum above runway
threshold or touchdown zone)
CAT I 200 feet (61 metres) 1,800 feet (550 metres) 1,600 feet Either visibility not less than 2,400 feet
(1,200 feet is approved (800 metres) (800 metres) or a runway visual range
at some airports), increased or 1,200 feet (RVR) not less than 1,800 feet
to 1,600 feet (800 metres) in Canada (550 metres) on runway with touchdown
for single crew operations zone and centerline lighting
CAT II 100 feet (30 metres) 1,200 feet (370 metres) N/A ICAO and FAA: 1,150 feet (350 metres)
or JAA: 980 feet (300 metres)
CAT IIIa No DH 700 feet (210 metres) N/A
CAT IIIb No DH 150 feet (46 metres) N/A
CAT IIIc No DH No RVR N/A As of 2012 this category is not yet
in operation anywhere in the world
as it requires guidance to taxi in zero
visibility as well. Category IIIc is not
mentioned in EU-OPS.
Special CAT I operation Special CAT II operation
• Standard instrument approach procedure • Standard instrument approach procedure using ILS
using the Instrument Landing System (ILS) flown to a DH 100 feet and RVR 1200 feet
flown to a DH 150 feet and RVR 1400 feet
• Differs from CAT II because it:
(nominal CAT I = DH 200 feet / RVR 1800 feet)
- Allows reduced ground lighting infrastructure
• Requires operational approval from flight standards
- Can be flown with Medium Intensity Approach
including pilot training
Lighting System (MIALS) with runway alignment
• Must be flown with a HUD down to the DH indicator lights (MALSR)
- Does not require runway centreline or runway
touchdown lighting.
• Requires operational approval from flight standards
including pilot training
• Must be flown with:
- Automatic landing
- Or a HUD providing guidance to touch-down
Head-Up Display
Innovation catalyser
The widespread use and appreciation of HUD by pilots has led to new concepts in
information display. The HUD guidance is based on trajectory and energy manage-
ment while the HDD (Head-Down Display) traditionally provides pitch and thrust data.
These differences in flying reference brought a general reflection on the possibility to
extend HUD symbols on HDD displays. The operational concept and the technical
feasibility are being assessed in Airbus’ design offices with the objective to have a
mock-up this year that will be evaluated by test pilots with the support of operation
and human factor experts. This “enhanced Primary Flight Display” (PFD) will ease
HUD to HDD transitions.
In the same mind-set that instigated the CAAC’s directive for Chinese airspace, there
are several projects to implement new display features to ease guidance during
take-off and landing manoeuvres. As a see-through display technology, the HUD
enables augmented reality such as synthetic vision, enhanced vision, etc., but also a
lot of possible conformal symbols to improve situation awareness. Airbus is assessing
the feasibility of new symbols.
Boresighting
The aim of the HUD boresighting, or ‘harmonisation procedure’, is to adjust the
components making up the HUD to guarantee the conformity of the HUD display with
the outside world and component interchangeability.
The Mounting TRay (MTR), support of the HUD projector and combiner, is mechani-
cally installed with an accuracy of 5 mrad (milliradian) on the aircraft’s pitch, roll and
yaw axis.
The projected image is then electronically calibrated by the HUD system itself bringing
the tolerance down to 3.5 mrad
65#TSAF
61
Pitch/roll measurement on the Air Data Inertial
Reference System (ADIRS) rack and on the
MTR using a clinometer.
Yaw calibration measurement is done using
a panel aligned with the aircraft axis and a
telescope mounted on the MTR.
Head-Up Displays can group information from several HDD screens
Head-Up Display
Available HUD configurations on new aircraft
• Single structural provisions - Overhead structural drills on Captain’s side
• Dual structural provisions - Overhead structural drills on Captain’s and Flight Officer’s sides
• Complete provisions - Mechanics, wiring, A-bay space
• Full installation - HUD fully installed and activated
Retrofit
Airbus Upgrade Services proposes Service Bulletins (SB) to install the HUD.
The installation of a HUD requires an adaptation to accommodate the HUD equipment,
the harnesses and controls, as well as an accurate positioning to ensure conformity of
the display with the outside world. Since the first HUD development, Airbus aircraft are
currently fitted with structural provisions for the installation of a HUD on the captain’s
side. Each aircraft programme has a separate Service Bulletin for the system’s
provisions that simplify HUD retrofits, and a further one for the actual HUD installation.
For the aircraft without structural provisions, the SBs are under study. The accuracy of
the symbology provided by HUD requires specific installation procedures (boresighting).
Already deployed in Airbus’ Final Assemble Lines (FAL), these procedures are also
listed in the SBs applicable for retrofit. Today this operation is only performed in Airbus’
FAL and requires specific skills and tooling. Support services are working on solutions
to qualify Maintenance Repair and Overhaul (MRO) organisations and simplify the
operation.
CONCLUSION
Head-Up display is an evolving technology that provides pilots with the ability to read flight control data projected
onto a transparent screen. The main operational benefit is situational awareness due to the exact alignment of guiding
information with the pilot’s forward-field view.
Recent air traffic constraints coupled with a symmetrical cockpit philosophy have accelerated Airbus’ policy to
integrate dual Head-Up Displays into all of its manufactured aircraft before 2018.
Head-Up Display has a huge potential. Two technologies that are currently being developed are the Enhanced Vision
System (EVS) and the Sythetic Vision System (SVS), that will allow pilots to see runways in otherwise extremely poor
visibility conditions.
Head-Up display retrofits are available for all A320 Family aircraft starting from MSN 3000.
65#TSAF
71
Aircraft HUD Forward Fit Retrofit
Single Dual Single Dual
Dual HUD on A320 Family neo
A318 Yes Yes
version as of Entry-Into-Service
A319 Yes Yes Yes 2015
New line fit dual HUD offer
A320 Yes Yes
as of March 2015 on A318 /
A321 MPP* Yes Yes Yes 2016 A319 / A320 / A350/ A380
(A321 in 2016)
A330 Not offerable 2015/2018** Not offerable 2018
A340 Not offerable Not offerable Dual HUD on A330 in 2018
A380 Yes Yes N/A Yes
Low Visibility Take-Off available
HUD
A350 A350 Not offerable Yes N/A On request on A318 / A319 / A320 / A350
* MPP: Multi Programme Project equipment
** 2015 for complete provisions / 2018 for full installation
Technical contact for sales
Maurice GARNIER
Display, Warning and HUD Systems Manager
AIRBUS
Maurice.Garnier@airbus.com
65#TSAF
81
Airline liveries
Airbus’ innovation to reduce livery painting time
In today’s competitive market, it has never been more
important to have a memorable and attractive brand,
and by far the largest visual application of an airline’s
brand is the livery of its aircraft.
Depending on brand orientation, an airline may simply wish this external decoration
to be a strict interpretation of their company’s visual identity, or maybe a fun,
colourful, exotic design that represents their warm corporate values or indeed
a particularly eye-catching design for a short-term promotional campaign.
The variations of aircraft livery are as endless as the creativity and inventiveness
of airlines. But whatever the branding strategy an airline may choose, the major
considerations - which are all directly associated with cost - are the time
and expertise needed in a paint shop to realize these ‘works of art’.
Article by
Pascal CORNET
Fleet Manager Embodiment Operations
AIRBUS
Pascal.Cornet@airbus.com
65#TSAF
91
Airline liveries
Until very recently, the multi-step plotting and masking involved in aircraft decoration
was achieved by highly experienced paint shop technicians, often working by eye.
Complicated designs took several times longer to prepare than to actually paint,
requiring weeks of aircraft downtime. Airlines clearly needed a better and more
adaptable solution.
Airbus Painting and Livery services worked with airlines to define their priorities:
• A fast and precise plotting of 2D designs onto a 3D surface
• Tools that allow a repeatable process
• An attainable quality identical to that of Airbus’ final assembly lines
in any paint shop
• An adaptable system for all Airbus aircraft
Airbus has not only invented, patented and put in place a modular set of turnkey
services that now allow all these requirements, but still undertakes - if required - the
management of working parties at selected Maintenance Repair and Overhaul (MRO)
organisations. In its role as the Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM), Airbus
provides the certifying documents associated with a new livery.
Airbus’ innovation to reduce livery painting time
As a direct answer to airline requests Airbus has developed a means of accelerating
the paint cycle for liveries. The solution includes the development of software that
projects a 2D image onto a virtual 3D Airbus aircraft with a conic projection (see fig 1).
The software then re-flattens the image keeping the distortions created by the
projection onto the 3D shape, and then uses these remapped images to create
optically perfect imagery once applied to the real 3D aircraft.
The figure below illustrates how a 2D shape is distorted when projected onto a
simple 3D form: a cylinder. Aircraft have some areas such as the nose, tail-plane
and tail-cone, which are more complex forms with multiple axis curves (known as
‘progressive surfaces’).
Fig 1: Conic projection
X
A circle projected onto the top half of a cylinder results in an egg-shaped surface.
The same projection seen from axis X is perceived as a circle.
65#TSAF
02
Airline liveries
A set of offers for airline livery painting
1 2 3 4 5 6
Mylar Livery
New livery Vectorized Service Paint
& adhesive painting/
design drawings Bulletin consulting
stencils applying
Turnkey offer: Project management of all offers selected in the package
Offer 1 Offer 2 Offer 3
New livery design Services for existing Service Bulletin to cover
(new design/redesign, special design) or new livery aircraft livery modification
Airbus’ Painting and Livery services Existing: Liveries that have already As the Original Equipment Manufacturer
design a new logo and/or new livery been mapped by Airbus onto a virtual (OEM) Airbus provides the certifying
for airlines in collaboration with Airbus’ 3D aircraft, can be converted to 2D document (Service Bulletin) which is
designers. This service has been vectorized drawings (or recalculated airworthiness approved by the aviation
especially created for new branding bitmap images). Other file formats can authority, to cover the aircraft
requirements. be generated on request such as .dxf, modification.
and .dwg or .ai.
This service is also used for the creation
of a livery based on a special events New: 2D livery designs are converted
or part of a promotional campaign. onto a virtual 3D Airbus mock-up using
a specific Computer Aided Design
(CAD) software tool developed specifi-
cally for this activity. The exact configu-
ration of the aircraft is ensured, taking
into account any evolution that impacts
the external surface (belly fairing,
antennae, etc.)
Liveries are validated by the customer
via webex.
65#TSAF
12
AAiirrlliinnee lliivveerriieess
Offer 4 Offer 5
Mylar™ sheets and the adhesive stencil technique Livery painting/applying
management
Once the virtual 3D livery has been calculated (input from Offer 2), using Airbus’ newly Airbus’ Paint and Livery department
developed and patented methods and device, it is then translated and transferred proposes its services in a project
from the 3D mock-up into a set of 2D surfaces to manufacture Mylar™ sheets and management role.
the precut adhesive stencils.
Ideally placed, Airbus can oversee livery
projects, integrate its livery offers (1 to 4)
Mylar™ sheets (multiple usage)
if required, and organize working parties
Mylar™ sheets are perforated with dashed lines which are used to make masking at selected Part-145 maintenance/repair
guidelines on the aircraft. The plastic sheets are cut-out in order to avoid distortion stations around the world.
when applied to the aircraft. The sheets can be precisely positioned between
themselves, and lined up with visible or physical elements on the aircraft such as
seams, antenna or windows.
Mylar™ is a brand of the semi-opaque, non-tearable plastic sheet that is often
Offer 6
used for architect plans, which means they can be used again and again.
Adhesive stencils (single usage) Paint consulting
These precut masks are mainly used to paint logos or complex areas. Letters or
shapes are precut into the low-tack adhesive sheet. To simplify accurate position-
Airbus also proposes its services
ing each sheet is also printed with guides for physical elements found on the
for kits application and paint process
aircraft. Then once the whole sheet has been stuck to the aircraft, the letters or
optimization with specialists from
shapes are peeled off revealing the masked area to be painted.
Airbus’ production paint shop.
The guides for physical elements of the aircraft that are printed onto both the Mylar™
sheets and the adhesive stencils allow their positioning on the aircraft without taking
any measurement.
Each set of Mylar™ sheets or adhesive stencils is delivered with descriptive layout
documents in order to execute the job accurately.
65#TSAF
22
Airline liveries
Sheet-to-sheet positioning of stencils
Mylar™ sheets and the adhesive stencils have physical features
of the aircraft printed onto the sheets allowing perfect alignment
65#TSAF
32
Airline liveries
Airbus livery services allow urgent request
reactivity for design definitions, vectorized
drawings, tool kits and realizing the livery
on the aircraft.
Existing
livery
Airline request
Weeks 1 2 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Airbus offer
Purchase order
Drawings
New
Kits (depending on complexity)
livery Offer Production
Service Bulletins
phase phase
The added-value of Airbus’ Paint and Livery service offers
• The same technology as that used in Airbus’ production line for final painting.
Any paint shop can be used to paint aircraft with a high quality result.
• The simplicity of the Mylar™ sheets’ and the adhesive stencils saves significant time
at the plotting-out stage.
• Overall aircraft grounding time is reduced by about 20% compared to traditional
methods, meaning increased aircraft availability and less time in paint shops.
• Airbus Paint and Livery services provides a single point-of-contact for airlines’
livery project management.
Distinctive branding that has been
achieved with adhesive stencils
Airline liveries
65#TSAF
42
Airline liveries
Aircraft branding - the sky’s the limit
No matter how imaginative an airline’s creative people are, a technical solution exists
to realize the most complex painted aircraft liveries. If you add adhesive, or printed
adhesive into the equation, the sky is the limit. Adhesive plastic also offers a quick
solution to realize a new aircraft livery (e.g.: a late production change or livery develop-
ment) and can be applied in any closed hangar environment. Because adhesive decals
can be removed, this solution also provides airlines with an excellent marketing and
communication interface for events and promotions.
From personal experience of three recent repaints of A330-200 by a MRO which has
never applied this livery to an A330 before, I can tell you that the work your team puts in
and delivers has resulted in immeasurable benefits; to their paint shop’s turn-around time,
ability to rework the livery and ultimately to the Qantas brand.
Qantas Airlines
CONCLUSION
The Airbus Paint and Livery service now provides a complete range of Find out how Airbus’ Painting and Livery
services that allow any airline’s paint shop to reproduce aircraft liveries services can help you boost your brand
to the exact same high standards as those performed in the Airbus paint image by contacting our generic email
shop. Airbus patented technology allows perfect repeatability between address:
aircraft, and the use of Mylar™ sheets and/or adhesive stencils reduces
livery.services@airbus.com
the overall time to realize a new aircraft livery by 20%.
The same simple-to-use technology allows shorter lead times and a
more reactive service.
Airbus Painting and Livery service offers are “à la carte”. Customers can
choose a single offer or the entire package as a turnkey solution.
This innovative service allows Airbus’ design teams to work with airlines
to create and install original, high-quality liveries.
65#TSAF
52
‘‘
’’
65#TSAF
62
Managing
airframe
aerodynamic
performance
It doesn’t have to be a drag
Article by (left to right)
Dominique GAREL Like many machines, aircraft can become less efficient
Aerodynamic Audit Tool Project Engineer
with use. In simple terms a loss of efficiency means that
and Fleet Reliability Manager
AIRBUS the aircraft burns a little more fuel to achieve a given
Dominique.Garel@airbus.com
mission. In percentage terms the additional fuel burnt
Simon WESELBY is tiny but with an A320 typically consuming around
Aerodynamic Audit Tool Project Manager
US$6 million worth of fuel annually minimizing efficiency
and Fuel and Emissions Performance Manager
AIRBUS losses can prove to be valuable for the airline.
Simon.Weselby@airbus.com
Managing airframe aerodynamic performance
65#TSAF
72
Why do aircraft lose efficiency?
For an aircraft to fly, it must generate enough lift to overcome its weight. Lift is created
by the wings traveling, at speed, through the air. The aircraft’s engines push the
aircraft through the air but as the aircraft travels through the air, resistance is created.
This resistance is known as drag.
Lift
Drag Thrust
Weight
Drag is the resistance of the air to an object passing through it. It is the phenomenon
we feel as the force on our arm when we put it out of a moving car’s window. But, in
the case of an aircraft, drag is also created when the wings produce lift (aerodynamic
engineers refer to this as induced drag).
So why should an aircraft’s drag increase in use?
Sources of additional airframe drag can be categorized into four groups:
1) Steps between two parts of the aircraft’s surface: A small but sudden change
in the aircraft’s exterior surface will disrupt the smooth flow of air over it and result
in an increase in drag. Steps can occur between doors and the surrounding
surfaces. They can also occur between the wing and flight control surfaces
(ailerons, flaps, slats, spoilers, etc.).
2) Gaps: On a new aircraft, gaps between fixed structural elements such as the wing
and the fuselage are eliminated by seals. These seals can become damaged over
time, leading to gaps appearing. Gaps can also interrupt the smooth air flow and
lead to additional drag.
3) Leaks: To prevent leaks, seals are used in many locations. As already mentioned,
they can become damaged. For example, a damaged door seal can allow
pressurized air to escape from the cabin to the outside of the aircraft. The resulting
jet of air would be perpendicular to the fuselage. Similarly, a leaking seal around a
wing spoiler can allow air to travel through the wing structure, passing from the high
pressure under-wing area, to the low pressure over-wing area. This airflow
undermines the efficiency of the wing and creates additional drag.
4) Surface damage: While the aircraft may remain completely airworthy with small
dents and scratches on certain exterior surface, these defects can increase drag in
the same way as steps and gaps (described previously). Paint peeling can also
have a similarly detrimental effect.
Today, we know that these phenomena can occur on our in-service fleet.
Also, thanks to the work of the fuel efficiency working group, we know that airlines
want to manage aerodynamic degradation on their aircraft. However, the members
of the working group were confronted by a “chicken and egg” situation.
They could not justify the development of a service to manage aerodynamic
degradation because neither they, nor the airlines, have an understanding of how,
and to what extent airframes degrade in service. The means to move forward was
provided by the Airbus Research and Technology team who provided us with
support and resources to develop the Aerodynamic Audit Tool
for A320 Family aircraft.
65#TSAF
82
Managing airframe aerodynamic performance
Airbus’ Aerodynamic Audit Tool for A320 Family aircraft
While developing the tool, Airbus wanted to minimize the inspection costs: particular attention was paid to
defining “simple” inspections that do not require specific tooling or disassembly. However, activation of some
aircraft systems cannot be avoided, hydraulic pressurization, for example, is required to stabilize flight control
surfaces and allow access to spoiler and slat seals. The order in which the inspections are proposed has also
been considered, again with the objective of minimizing the time required.
iPad® application hosts the list
of inspections for a complete
aerodynamic audit via intuitive
and ergonomic screens.
65#TSAF
92
Managing airframe aerodynamic performance
Recorded findings
Fuel Penalty
Zone Inspection Add
Finding (KGs per FH)
info.
Additional fuel Slat 1 average mis-rig None None 0
consumption ... - - -
associated with Spoiler 1 average mis-rig 0.2 cm T P 0
each defect ... - - -
computed and Flap seal - inboard 8 cm T 5
made available to Flap seal - outboard 0 cm None 0
nominated airline Flap Seal - Outboard - wing
0 cm None 0
Left
personnel. to surface
wing
... - - -
Screen mock-up
Spoiler 1 seal - cordwise 15 cm None 6
shown.
... - - -
Flap Track Fairing 4 - Fixed
0.5 cm T 1
to Movable steps
... - - -
Upper wing paint (fwd-inbd ) X:80 cm Y:60 cm P.50 % P 4
Right wing ... - -
Fwd Fus ... - -
...
Aft Fus - -
fwd-inbd = Forward inboard Fwd fus = forward fusilage T = text P = pictures
Airlines wishing to explore the aerodynamic
condition of their A320 Family aircraft using
the Aerodynamic Audit Tool are invited to
contact Airbus. The tool will be available on a
free-of-charge basis during the investigation
period. Airbus plans to release the tool during
the third quarter of 2015 – the investigation
will last six months.
Following the completion of the investigation,
Airbus will be in a position to decide if indeed
the tool can be made commercially available.
Commercialisation would allow the tool’s
applicability to be extended to other aircraft
programmes and, potentially, allow new
functions to further optimize the audit process
to be implemented and versions of the tool
for other computing devices.
65#TSAF
03
Managing airframe aerodynamic performance
Zoom on the physics of drag
Although it does not feel like it, air has stickiness; a resistance to motion called
viscosity. It is this property of coffee that causes a recently stirred cup to slow down
and eventually stop rotating. The viscosity of air causes the air touching the skin
of a moving aircraft to be pulled along with it, at the same speed. The air slightly
further from the skin will be pulled along (by the air touching the skin) slightly more
slowly, and the air next to that slower still. The air at a certain distance from the skin
will not be dragged along at all. This is the edge of a region called the boundary layer.
The thickness of the boundary layer and the speed of the air within it determine the
drag due to viscosity. The nature of the air movement within the boundary layer
is also important; a smooth movement of air within the boundary layer causes less
drag than a chaotic one.
Tim CHANT A surface irregularity can compromize the previously smooth boundary layer.
Aerodynamic Audit Tool Project Engineer If the irregularity is prominent enough, the air will not be able to smoothly flow past
and Aerodynamic Performance Engineer the feature. The air formally next to the skin will separate from its surface and form a
AIRBUS chaotic swirling pattern. The smoothness of air within the boundary layer is disturbed
Tim.Chant@airbus.com and its thickness is increased, causing an increase in drag. Going back to the coffee
analogy; if a spoon is dipped in a recently stirred cup of coffee, the previously smooth
rotation of the liquid is spoilt by chaotic eddies coming off the back of the spoon.
The drag caused by the spoon slows the coffee down much more quickly than when
it is left alone.
Whilst this type of drag cannot be removed completely, it can be minimized by
attention to surface finish, paint smoothness, cleanliness, careful positioning of skin
joints, minimising steps and gaps at those joints and at moving surfaces (control
surfaces and doors).
Fuel efficiency working group
Airbus’ fuel efficiency working group is a collaborative process that harnesses the
power of fuel efficiency stakeholders (Airbus, its airline customers, members of the air
traffic organisations and airport management communities) working together to
identify and develop new opportunities to save fuel and optimize operational efficiency.
Airbus maintains an extensive list of stakeholder contacts and will invite contributions
from appropriate contacts as the various opportunities are explored and developed.
To date, Airbus has hosted four annual face-to-face meetings in Toulouse (France)
to review progress, share new ideas and prioritize activities.
Zoom on engine efficiency
In addition to the loss of efficiency due to increasing drag on the airframe,
the aircraft’s engines can become less efficient with use. A contributor is the
accumulation of tiny particles of dirt and other substances on the surfaces of
the engine’s fan and compressor aerofoils. These aerofoils have very precise
profiles that contribute significantly to the engine’s efficiency. So, particles
accumulate, profiles change, efficiency reduces and fuel burn increases.
Unlike airframe drag, engine degradation is a widely recognized phenomenon
in the commercial aviation industry. Typically, it is controlled through an engine
washing programme that removes most of the accumulated particles and
restores some of the engine’s efficiency (efficiency is not fully restored as
normal engine wear also affects efficiency).
Note: Your engine maintenance provider can advise on washing programmes
and cost effective engine maintenance schedules.
CONCLUSION
The Aerodynamic Audit Tool Research and Technology project will allow Airbus and operators of A320 Family
aircraft to have a far more complete understanding of airframe in-service performance degradation.
For success the project requires as many airlines as possible to perform audits on as many aircraft as possible - new
and old, across the world. We have designed the audit process to be simple and low-cost. The audit tool and the
analysis of the findings will be provided free-of-charge during the investigation period. Initial assessments suggest that,
once the detected defects are corrected, net savings in excess of US$25,000 per aircraft per year might be possible.
All A320 Family operators are invited to participate in the project and may contact Airbus at any time during the
investigation (scheduled to run for 6 months from third quarter 2015).
As ever, Airbus is looking for effective ways of helping its customers become more successful with its
products – hoping that this project will demonstrate the added value of maintaining the aircraft’s aerodynamic
condition for the benefit of the operators.
65#TSAF
13
Managing airframe aerodynamic performance
Economic assessment – a starting point
While we do not yet have a clear view of the actual aerodynamic defects occurring
on an A320 Family aircraft, we can evaluate the economics of the additional fuel being
consumed and the cost of fixing the defect. By making some conservative assumptions
about the size of the defects (step and gap sizes, length of damaged seal, etc.) we
can express the cost of correcting a defect in terms of the time that defect needs to
consume the same value in fuel. In some cases the figure may be as little as two
weeks (i.e. in two weeks the defect has resulted in an additional fuel burn that is
equivalent to the cost of finding and fixing it), the majority of defects are less than two
months and for the lower impact or higher correction cost items, the figure may be
of four months.
65#TSAF
23
??
Taking
lithium-ion
technology
to new
heights
Less weight
and less maintenance
for batteries
Airbus has been working in collaboration with Saft, the world leader in industrial
batteries, since Airbus’ origin in the 1970s. Saft currently provides batteries for all
Airbus aircraft and has been selected to provide the new generation lithium-ion (Li-ion)
battery technology on the A350.
Ranging from small consumer applications such as smartphones and touchpads, to
large industrial applications in railways, telecommunications, electric vehicles, military
aircraft and satellites, Li-ion batteries have established an outstanding track record
over many years. For example, more than 1.6MWh of Saft Li-ion batteries are currently
in orbit, delivering reliable on-board power for over 125 different satellites.
Article by (left to right)
Batteries on A350 aircraft
Mohammed-Amine MCHACHTI
Electrical System Engineer There are four identical and interchangeable batteries installed in the A350 avionics
AIRBUS bay. Along with their charging role, they also provide a ‘no break power’ (NBPT)
Mohammed-Amine.Mchachti@airbus.com function, meaning that the batteries are permanently connected to the aircraft’s direct
current buses in order to ensure continuous power during electrical network reconfig-
Jean-Marc THEVENOUD urations between the Auxiliary Power Unit (APU) shutdown and engine start, engine
Marketing Manager shutdown and APU start, etc.
Saft Aviation
Jean-Marc.Thevenoud@saftbatteries.com
65#TSAF
33
Li-ion batteries
On the A350,
the batteries
perform several
vital functions:
Emergency batteries 1 and 2
• Emergency Electricity (EMER ELEC):
In case of emergency - Total Engine
Flame Out (TEFO) or Loss of Main
Electrical System (LMES), the batteries
supply vital parts of the network
during the Ram Air Turbine (RAT)
deployment, last phases of landing
and emergency evacuation
• Aircraft power on ground
• Power Distribution Maintenance
Advantages
Interface (PDMI) on battery:
enabling the maintenance operator
• Lighter
to open/close the newly introduced
By using only four Li-ion batteries on the A350, Airbus has reduced weight
SSPC/RCCB technologies
by more than 80kg, contributing to reduction in fuel consumption.
Main battery 1
• On-board controls
• Towing on battery: enabling power Direct control from cockpit panel.
during the towing of the aircraft
• Real-time communications
• Auxiliary Power Unit (APU) start The batteries charge and health can be constantly monitored in real-time
(+ main battery 2): to start the APU and have autonomous Built In Test Equipement.
• Less frequent maintenance checks
Main battery 2
The regular checks, periodical check and general overhaul needed with other
• Refuel on battery (+ main battery 1): types of batteries are now replaced with a single check every two years up to
enabling the refuelling 6 years and then on a yearly basis.
As Saft Li-ion cells are hermetically
sealed and never need servicing,
maintenance operations are
essentially capacity checks every
two years.
These checks also have the added
advantage of being performed
directly on the aircraft using the
BattCARE® Ground Support
Equipment (GSE), thus saving
considerable time for the operator.
65#TSAF
43
Li-ion batteries
65#TSAF
53
Li-ion batteries
GSE for simple
Different operations can be performed on-wing
and off-wing such as:
battery maintenance
• Periodic battery control, meaning capacity
and impedance measurement
• Commissioning charge
• Storage charge
• Discharge
• Battery status check
The on-wing capability allows the four batteries that
equip the A350 to be monitored on-board without
removing the batteries from the aircraft. This allows
time-saving of about two hours per aircraft.
65#TSAF
63
Li-ion batteries
The very simple GSE tasks can
be safely performed by one person.
a) Plugging
The GSE needs to be connected with an electrical cable, the voltage requirement
being 110 to 264 volts. There are two cables J1 and J2 that connect the GSE to the
battery - J2 being the ‘control power’ that allows communication between the two
and J1 the power cable. Both cables can be provided in two different lengths: 3 metres
for off-wing or battery shop operations and 18 metres for on-wing operations.
The J1 and J2 cables then have to be connected to the lithium-ion battery.
Connection is quite straightforward and easy to perform. The J1 cable is connected
to the battery and securely tightened. Then the J2 cable is connected to the battery
lining up with the guide then tightened into place. Then finally, two contacters from
J1 and J2 are fastened together.
b) Start-up of the GSE
Once the connections have been made, the GSE can be started. As it can also be
used outdoors, the front panel is protected by a polycarbonate cover. It contains the
touch screen display, the main breaker, the USB port and RJ45 interfaces.
The RJ45 interface is used to upload a new GSE software version when required.
Saft has developed a friendly, easy-to-use interface. The basic operations are done
through the battery menu.
c) Check of the battery
Periodic checks of the battery are performed by accessing the battery menu -> Test.
Then you must complete the fields of the ‘Test Configuration’ screen.
Record in the battery logbook the date of the test as well as the capacity, impedance
and temperature values displayed on the GSE screen. The capacity and the imped-
ance values have then to be compared to reference values by the operator.
If the results are correct, the battery can be recharged by the GSE, or directly by the
aircraft. Alternatively it can be put on long term storage after a storage charge.
d) Charge and discharge of the battery
The GSE can charge and discharge the battery. The battery should be charged in
order to be installed in the aircraft, and for storage, a full charge should be performed;
followed by a discharge with a State Of Charge (SOC) of 70%.
The GSE allows a very quick charge, from 20% of State Of Charge to 90% in less than
45 minutes.
e) Data transfer
The GSE can store up to 16 test records and will lock itself when this number is
reached. The data must then be transferred towards a dedicated Saft web portal by
using a USB key and uploaded to the Saft web portal via internet. The Saft web portal
contains the battery test history, the technical documentation, training support and
helpdesk services.
At the end of the transfer, Saft will acknowledge the receipt by providing an unlock key
code.
Once the checks have been performed on the batteries, the GSE is shut down, the
connector cable is unscrewed and then the J2 and J1 cables are disconnected from
the batteries and from the GSE. The cables can be stored inside the compartment at
the back of the GSE. Despite the GSE weighing 100 kg, it is easily movable by one
person thanks to its four wheels.
65#TSAF
73
Li-ion batteries
Technical description
The cutting-edge Li-ion battery on-board the A350 is the result of 15 years of Saft
research in Li-ion solutions, 10 of which spent developing aviation-grade Li-ion
systems. In order to guarantee optimum performance, Saft’s batteries are more than
just the VL30P® Li-ion cells, but also comprise a full ‘smart’ Battery Management Sys-
tem (BMS) with dedicated electronic monitoring, software and algorithms. Battery
information such as the State Of Charge (SOC) and State Of Health (SOH) can be
communicated in real-time to the system display of the aircraft.
Safety
Due to the innovative nature of using Li-ion technology in commercial aviation, the
regulatory authorities require an enhanced development assurance level to ensure the
highest level of safety of the final product.
In order to guarantee an optimum performance and in the same time, ensuring a high
level of safety, the Li-ion batteries are subject to strict development methodology.
Indeed, the battery system developed by the Saft system development unit is the first
Li-ion battery in the world that is compliant to DAL A, the highest achievable Design
Assurance Level on an aircraft (there are five levels of compliance that range in severity
from A to E). Therefore, Li-ion batteries are conceived in compliance with the DAL-A
level of design requirements according to DO-254, DO-178B and DO-311, integrating
an embedded electronic module battery management system to meet the safety
requirement.
CONCLUSION
Robust, light, and easy to maintain, the new generation lithium-ion
batteries have proven a great technological leap forward. They adhere
to the highest achievable Design Assurance Level of safety.
Four batteries equip the A350. Although the batteries require very little
maintenance, the usual verification tasks can easily be done on-wing as
well as on a shop floor with Saft’s Ground Support Equipment (GSE),
saving considerable time and costs for A350 operators.
FAST
from the PAST
There wouldn’t be any future without the experience of the past.
65#TSAF
83
Before pilots relied on ILS signals (see stealthy building panels article)
for their landing indications, many other techniques were explored.
Around 1937 a mechanical “landing feel apparatus” was tested on a Junkers G38.
When crossing the field boundary, the pilot lowered a pole which was held in
position by the slipstream.
When the pole touched the ground, this was indicated in the cockpit by means of
an instrument and/or acoustically.
The pilot then knew his altitude, depending on the length of the pole (between two
and five metres) and knew to round out and start the landing flare.
It was a crazy low-tech idea, but it worked!
egatireH
etaroproC
puorG
subriA
fo
ysetruoC
We’ve got it covered
Around the clock, around the world,
Airbus has more than 240 field representatives
based in over 110 cities
WORLDWIDE TECHNICAL, MATERIAL & LOGISTICS TRAINING CENTRES
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 1980 Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC) Airbus Training Centre
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 1818 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3400 Toulouse, France
Fax:+33 (0)5 6193 3500 Tel: +33 (0)5 6193 3333
USA/CANADA
airtac@airbus.com Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 2094
Tel: +1 703 834 3484
Spares AOG/Work Stoppage Airbus Maintenance
Fax: +1 703 834 3464
• Outside the Americas: Training Centre
CHINA Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4001 Hamburg, Germany
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4011 Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288
Tel: +86 10 8048 6161 Ext. 5020
aog.spares@airbus.com Fax: +49 (0)40 7438 8588
Fax: +86 10 8048 6162
• In the Americas:
Airbus Training Centre Americas
FIELD SERVICE SUPPORT Tel: +1 70 3729 9000
Miami, Florida - U.S.A.
ADMINISTRATION Fax: +1 70 3729 4373
Tel: +1 305 871 3656
aog.na@airbus.com
Tel: +33 (0)5 6719 0413
Fax: +1 305 871 4649
Fax: +33 (0)5 6193 4964
Spares In-Flight orders outside the Americas:
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4002
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4012
ifd.spares@airbus.com
Spares related HMV issues outside the Americas:
Tel: +49 (0)40 5076 4003
Fax: +49 (0)40 5076 4013
hmv.spares@airbus.com
Spares RTN/USR orders in the Americas:
Please contact your dedicated customer spares
account representative csr.na@airbus.com
65#TSAF
93
How can I fly more
passengers to the
most popular airports
at peak times?
Fly the A380. The world’s most
spacious commercial aircraft.
Capture more high-yield traffic
on the busiest routes and offer
the highest passenger appeal
with 18+ inch seats in economy.
Airbus is the answer.
airbus.com
© AIRBUS, 2015. All rights reserved. Airbus, its logo and the product names are registered trademarks.
12206_AIR_QA_TowerBridge_Fast_297x210_1.0.indd 1 23/06/2015 14:31
