E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
7
4
T
S
A
F
FAST47_COUV.qxp:couvFAST41 rectoverso 06/01/11 11:36 Page 2
FAST
47
J A N U A R Y 2 0 1 1
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
events
Just happened
Material, Logistics, Suppliers & Warranty sym-
posium
This event was held in October 2010, gathering impact of such services on the aircraft residual
97 customers and 39 suppliers in Paris, France. value. A very productive lessors’ caucus
Various presentations, live demos and inter- emphasized our ability to react quickly to
active sessions highlighted the latest innovative lessors’ queries and specific requirements.
Finally, a satis faction questionnaire showed
developments and initiatives in the material,
that lessors were very satisfied with Airbus’
logistics, suppliers and warranty fields. A very
customer support and by its special
active exchange of views took place during the
consideration for leasing companies.
12 interactive sessions and caucus discussions
on different material management topics. Coming soon
Together, the attendees had the opportunity to
shape the future requirements and business Airbus Corporate Jet (ACJ) forum
The next Airbus Corporate Jet forum will be
models in the material, logistics, suppliers and
held in Hong Kong, China, from 29 to 31
warranty domains.
March 2011. The invitations and programmes
A380 symposium will be sent at the beginning of 2011.
This symposium took place in Singapore, in
November, and featured an airline caucus Performance and Operations conference
where the operators were able to provide The 17thPerformance and Operations conference
detailed feedback on their A380 operational will take place in Dubai, from 9 to 13 May 2011.
experience and expectations, for a review by Organized by Airbus Flight Operations Support
Airbus and the suppliers. and Services since 1980, this biennial event
Airbus representatives responded that the provides flight crews, operations specialists, flight
ongoing enhancement of maintenance and operations engineers and performance specialists
operational procedures were well on the way to with a unique opportunity to constructively
meeting its objective of 98.5% operational exchange views and information, and increase
reliability for the A380 fleet, by the middle of mutual cooperation and communication. The
2011. The operators recognized the efforts invitations will soon be sent out.
made by Airbus teams, pointing out their
exceptional support, commitment and excellent
A320 Family symposium
work.
The next Airbus A320 Family symposium will
Airbus Leasing Support conference be held in Toronto, Canada, from the 23rd to
The 7thAirbus Leasing Support conference took 26thMay 2011. An Operators Information Telex
place last December in Miami, U.S.A., with (OIT) with the programme will be sent out at
more than 130 participants coming from 43 the beginning of 2011.
different leasing companies. Airbus Family symposiums are held for each
A particular focus was put on upcoming rules Airbus programme every two years and target
and regulations and the associated upgrade
airline engineering and maintenance managers.
solutions. The A320, A330/A340 and
The prime function of these meetings is to
A300/A310 families’ issues, solutions and new
enable two-way communication, leading to an
developments were presented.
ever safer and more efficient fleet.
Airbus detailed all the new services for lessors
to ease aircraft transfers. An Flight Hour
Services-Tailored Support Package (FHS-TSP)
presentation was given to highlight the benefits
of Airbus services to lessors and the positive
74
TSAF
FAST47_COUV.qxp:couvFAST41 rectoverso 20/12/10 11:15 Page 3
JJ UA NL YU A 2R 0Y 0 72 0 1 1
40
F L I G H T
A I R W O R T H I N E S S
S U P P O R T
T E C H N O L O G Y
Customer Services
Events
Demonstrating the green trajectory
Fuel efficient trajectory management tested
on revenue flights
Tom MAIER
Automatic Dependent Surveillance
Broadcast (ADS-B)
Publisher: Bruno PIQUET Communications development for Air Traffic
Editor: Lucas BLUMENFELD Management
Page layout: Quat’coul Christine VIGIER
Cover: Optical fibre used on aircraft
Picture from Hervé GOUSSE Optical fibre on aircraft
ExM Company
When the light speed serves data transmission
Authorization for reprint of FAST Magazine articles should be requested Stéphane BOUYSSOU
from the editor at the FAST Magazine e-mail address given below
Customer Services Communications
A300/A310 Family optimized air-vent inlet
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 43 88
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 47 73 NACA Duct
e-mail: fast.magazine@airbus.com
Continuous engineering solutions for fuel savings
Printer: Amadio
Charles VALE
FAST Magazine may be read on Internet Hannah RINGROW
http://www.airbus.com/en/services/publications/
under ‘Quick references’
ISSN 1293-5476 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
Airbus business radar
© AIRBUS S.A.S. 2010. AN EADS COMPANY
Carlo K. NIZAM
All rights reserved. Proprietary document
Paul-Antoine CALANDREAU
By taking delivery of this Magazine (hereafter “Magazine”), you accept on behalf of
your company to comply with the following. No other property rights are granted by the Jamil KHALIL
delivery of this Magazine than the right to read it, for the sole purpose of information.
This Magazine, its content, illustrations and photos shall not be modified nor Enhanced spare part engineering support
reproduced without prior written consent of Airbus S.A.S. This Magazine and the
materials it contains shall not, in whole or in part, be sold, rented, or licensed to any Smart spare parts’ design for a part standardisation
third party subject to payment or not. This Magazine may contain market-sensitive or
other information that is correct at the time of going to press. This information involves Tanja BUCHHOLZ
a number of factors which could change over time, affecting the true public Andy J. MASON
representation. Airbus assumes no obligation to update any information contained in
this document or with respect to the information described herein. The statements Kay JASCHOB
made herein do not constitute an offer or form part of any contract. They are based on
Airbus information and are expressed in good faith but no warranty or representation
is given as to their accuracy. When additional information is required, Airbus S.A.S can Electrical installations
be contacted to provide further details. Airbus S.A.S shall assume no liability for any Past to future
damage in connection with the use of this Magazine and the materials it contains, even
if Airbus S.A.S has been advised of the likelihood of such damages. This licence is
governed by French law and exclusive jurisdiction is given to the courts and tribunals of Customer Services Worldwide
Toulouse (France) without prejudice to the right of Airbus to bring proceedings for
infringement of copyright or any other intellectual property right in any other court of Around the clock... Around the world
competent jurisdiction.
Airbus, its logo, A300, A310, A318, A319, A320, A321, A330,
A340, A350XWB, A380 and A400M are registered trademarks.
E
N
I
Z
A
G
A
M
L
A
C
I
N
H
C
E
T
S
U
B
R
I
A
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 1
47
2
8
14
21
24
30
36
37
This issue of FAST Magazine has been printed
on paper produced without using chlorine, to reduce
Photo copyright Airbus
Photo credits: waste and help conserve natural resources.
Airbus Photographic Library, ExMCompany, Airbus France Every little helps!
1
EN-ROUTE EN-ROUTE
Sector A Sector B
TMA
Terminal Area
Surface • Direct routings/less airways
operation
• Optimum altitude • Opti
• Minimum time tracks • Idle descent • Reduced clim
• Dynamic re-routing • Reduced engine taxi in/out and
• Improved coordination track miles • Gate hold • Dep
- Amongst ATC sectors • Unimpeded taxi proc
- With military cust
• Required Time of Arrival (4D) aircr
foot
weiv
EDIS
weiv
POT
DEMONSTRATING THE GREEN TRAJECTORY - FUEL EFFICIENT TRAJECTORY MANAGEMENT TESTED ON REVENUE FLIGHTS
AARRIVAL
DEPAR
• Curved RNP approach
- Noise abatement
- Track mile savings
• RNP to ILS transition
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 2
Demonstrating
the green trajectory
Fuel efficient trajectory management
tested on revenue flights
At the 5th Aviation and Environment Summit in obtained when airlines, airports and Air
Geneva, Switzerland, in September 2010, one Navigation Service Providers work hand in hand,
could get an impression of the multitude of often with the support of the aircraft
initiatives which our industry is pursuing, to fulfil manufacturer. This article depicts, through
its engagement for an environmental compatible examples, how revenue flights can be
growth. Besides research looking typically into instrumental to trial more fuel efficient Air Traffic
improved airframe, engine designs and alternative Management procedures with the objective to
fuels, the optimization of the flight trajectory is implement them on a regular basis.
identified as an area where quick wins can be
Tom MAIER
Senior Manager CNS/ATM
System Sales & Marketing
Airbus Engineering
2
EN-ROUTE EN-ROUTE EN-ROUTE
Sector A Sector B Sector C
TMA
Terminal Area
Surface
• Direct routings/less airways • Direct routings/less airways
operation
• Optimum altitude • Optimum • Optimum altitude
• Minimum time tracks • Idle descent • Reduced climb speed • Minimum time tracks
• Dynamic re-routing • Reduced engine taxi in/out and profile • Dynamic re-routing
• Improved coordination track miles • Gate hold • Departure • Improved coordination
- Amongst ATC sectors • Unimpeded taxi procedure - Amongst ATC sectors
- With military customised to - With military
• Required Time of Arrival (4D) aircraft's noise • Required Time of Arrival (4D)
footprint
weiv
EDIS
weiv
POT
DEMONSTRATING THE GREEN TRAJECTORY - FUEL EFFICIENT TRAJECTORY MANAGEMENT TESTED ON REVENUE FLIGHTS
AARRIVAL DEPARTURE
• Curved RNP approach
- Noise abatement
- Track mile savings
• RNP to ILS transition
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 3
Background present aircraft capa bilities in the
Communication, Na vi gation and
Surveillance (CNS) domain. The
One of the programmes which
Asia and Pacific Initiative to
takes systematically advantage of
Reduce Emissions (ASPIRE) is the
revenue flights is the Atlantic
equivalent programme for that
Interoperability Initiative to
region and was launched in Febru -
Reduce Emissions (AIRE), which
ary 2008.
was signed on highest level at the
Paris Air Show in 2007, between These programmes have to be seen
the Administrator of the FAA in the wider context of SESAR
(Federal Aviation Administration) (Single European Sky ATM
and the European Union Vice Research) and NextGen, its sister
President/EC Transport Commis - initiative in the United States. Both
sioner. This initiative aims to started their respective develop -
reduce CO emissions and to ment work for redesigning the g l o s s a r y
2
accelerate the pace of change by ATM airborne and ground system,
taking advantage of best Air with the objective to enable ATC:Air Traffic Control
RNP:Required Navigation Performance
Traffic Management (ATM) prac - sustained air traffic growth at a
ILS:Instrument Landing System
tices, as shown in figure 1. It reduced service unit cost for the
enables the implemen tation of fuel airspace user, reducing the impact
efficient procedures for all phases on the environment without com -
of flights, taking full advantage of pro mising safety.
Green trajectory portfolio
Optimum trajectory Time Metering Fix
Figure 1
Traditional trajectory Waypoint
3
DEMONSTRATING THE GREEN TRAJECTORY - FUEL EFFICIENT TRAJECTORY MANAGEMENT TESTED ON REVENUE FLIGHTS
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 4
In May 2010, the SJU awarded
another 18 contracts for the
‘Performance of flight trials
validating solutions for the
reduction of CO emissions’. This
2
second wave of AIRE revenue
flight trials (AIRE2) started in fall
2010 and involves 42 partners,
with Airbus leading one of the
projects (A380 Transatlantic
SESAR and NextGen put the Green Flights) and contributing as
business trajectory in the centre of a partner to two further (Green
their operational concepts, which Shuttle and VINGA).
implies that the airspace user’s
preferred way of flying is A380 Transatlantic
compromised to a minimum by Air
Green Flights
Traffic Management (ATM). Ena -
bled by enhanced on-board and
ground systems, the adherence to This project addresses shortfalls
the most efficient trajectory caused by congestion on ground
becomes the baseline for all flights. and in oceanic airspace on Air
France flights from New-York to
In the light to ensure a smooth Paris. The average departure taxi
transition to this target concept, time at JFK is more than 40
revenue flight trials started in the minutes long which justifies a two,
meantime to demonstrate locally instead of four engines taxi in most
some of the concept elements - as cases, saving typically 23kg of fuel
far as current equipment levels per minute. However, a prerequis ite
allow - under involvement of small for this procedure is to inform the
but representative stakeholder flight crew on the estimated take-
consortia. off time which is provided in the
frame of this trial to demonstrate
On the European side, the AIRE one benefit of the airport
flight trials are overseen by the Collaborative Decision Making
SESAR Joint Undertaking (SJU) - (CDM) concept.
the management body which was
set-up by the European Com- In the oceanic phase of flight,
mission and Eurocontrol as the most efficient trajectory is
founding members and which compromised by the North
counts now 15 more members Atlantic Oceanic Track System
coming from air navigation service (OTS), which imposes to stick to
providers, airports and industries - one of the predefined lateral
, including Airbus - with a strong tracks. Climbing to an optimum
involvement from airlines. AIRE is flight level is frequently hindered
building the first blocks of the by other traffic. The A380
SESAR Concept of Operations by Transatlantic Green Flight trial
testing 4D trajectory-based ope - takes advantage of the A380’s
rations and Performance-Based rather high optimum cruise level
Navigation (PBN). A batch of six (between FL390 to FL430) where
revenue flight trial projects was little other traffic is encountered.
executed in 2009 involving 18 The oceanic Air Traffic Control
partners and accumulating more Centres of Gander (NAV CANADA)
than 1,000 trial flights (known as and Shanwick (NATS) make
the European AIRE1 Exercise). arrangements to free the aircraft
This article will exemplary look at from the OTS. This allows
one of them, namely the Minimum planning the flight on a minimum
CO in Terminal area (MINT) time track and to choose the most
2
project, in which Airbus had a economic speed and cruise level.
partner role.
4
74
TSAF
DEMONSTRATING THE GREEN TRAJECTORY - FUEL EFFICIENT TRAJECTORY MANAGEMENT TESTED ON REVENUE FLIGHTS
Arrival flight phase their first generation Electronic
Stockholm RNP AR 0.3
Flight Instrument System (EFIS).
with a high approach chart
potential for The lateral trajectory of the 10
MINT flights was agreed with the
optimization
ATC sectors of Stockholm and
Malmö (Sweden), well before
The arrival is often the most leaving the cruise flight level and
constrained phase of the whole the ATC enabled a Continuous
flight. Speed and altitude Descent Operation (CDO) by
restrictions are frequent to manage avoiding altitude instructions.
the traffic flow within the Terminal Therefore, the aircraft could follow
Area (TMA) as well as the the most efficient vertical profile
transition from the En-route Sector with engines at idle, saving in an
to the TMA. Noise avoidance often average 145kg of fuel per arrival.
results in a considerable stretching Further, 20kg were saved through
of the flight path; 360° holdings or reduced track miles when
lengthy lateral ‘trombones’ are the compared to the standard
ultimate Air Traffic Control (ATC) Instrument Landing System (ILS)
means to get the landing sequence procedure.
built up. Successive clearances to
lower altitudes and vectoring put Combining Performance-Based
the flight crew in a reactive ‘open Navigation (PBN) with Continuous
loop’ situation, in which the arrival Descent Operations (CDO)
trajectory is not fixed, neither constitutes an operational concept
vertically, nor laterally. This which is feasible for many regional
prevents following a predefined airports or for major airports at low
route which is a prerequisite for traffic hours. Often, the main
properly planning and executing hurdles are more of an institutional
the most energy efficient descent nature and a question of changing
Curved noise abatement
profiles. habits, rather than technical.
approach into Stockholm:
Suggesting a revenue flight trial
After having been tested in
The 'Minimum CO 2 in Terminal project can be a good means for the the MINT project, the
area' (MINT) project addressed a airline to improve the situation and procedure was published
good part of these issues. It used obtain buy-in from the Air and is now applied on a
regular basis.
for the first time in Europe the Navigation Service Providers
aircraft’s Required Navigation (ANSP) and airports.
Performance with Authorization
Required (RNP AR) for a +/- 0.3 Time as the 4th
nautical miles lateral accuracy in a
navigation
curved approach (RNP AR 0.3) for
the purpose of noise abatement at dimension
Stockholm, Sweden (see approach
chart in figure 2). Before
For both, airborne and ground
publishing the procedure, Airbus
sides in high traffic situations, the
contributed with fly-ability
optimization of the arrival
analysis through simu lator sessions
trajectory is more complex and
and ensured that speed and altitude
requires additional means which
constraints are not compromising
are developed in SESAR and
the most fuel efficient descent.
NextGen. Some of these technical
enablers are related to the addition
Novair, the airline partner in the
of the time aspect for trajectory
MINT project, recently upgraded
management.
the Flight Management System
(FMS) on their A321 fleet to the
latest ‘Release 1A’ standard, which
allows flying the RNP AR 0.3
procedure in combination with
5
hcetvaN
fo ysetruoC
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 5
Figure 2
DEMONSTRATING THE GREEN TRAJECTORY - FUEL EFFICIENT TRAJECTORY MANAGEMENT TESTED ON REVENUE FLIGHTS
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 6
As the Continuous Descent at and departing from Gothenburg
Operation (CDO) prevents the Air Landvetter airport, in Sweden. En-
Traffic Controller (ATCO) to apply route, the flight follows a planned
the traditional altitude and heading direct routing, which becomes now
instructions during the descent, the possible with the implementation
concept previews that additional of the Free Route Airspace Sweden
Required Time of Arrival
information be provided in return, concept. Improved service level
(RTA) page on MCDU
in the form of arrival time for a agreements amongst adjacent
significant metering fix. This control sectors, including the
Figure 3
waypoint is defined from a traffic Danish Air Traffic Control, shall
flow management point of view enable that the arrival trajectory be
and may typically be a merging known to the flight crew already
point or a Terminal Area (TMA) before the end of the En-route
entry point. On-board, the phase. The crew then plans an idle
adherence to the trajectory’s time continuous descent choosing the
schedule is ensured within a optimum top of descent point.
certain tolerance by the Required Considering the traffic situation,
Time of Arrival (RTA) function, vertical ATC clearances shall not
which is accessible through the compromise the most fuel efficient
Multi-purpose Control and Display vertical profile.
Unit (MCDU), via the Flight Plan
(FLP) menu pages, as shown in The arrival trajectory leads then
This capability is rarely used
today but will increase in figure 3. On the ground side, the into a noise and fuel optimized
importance as operational ATCO is assisted by an Arrival RNP AR 0.3 procedure, followed
concepts emerge based on 4D Management (AMAN) tool which by a transition to the Instrument
trajectory management.
helps to build up, at an early stage, Landing System (ILS) approach.
the sequence of incoming traffic Through this new combination, it is
and which alerts in case of ensured that even under conditions
conflicts. of low approach minima, the most
efficient arrival trajectory can be
In anticipation of this operational followed. Another particularity is
concept, the MINT trials looked that a RNP procedure will be
also at the adherence to the designed, not based as usual on
estimated time of arrival over a very conservative theoretical wind
waypoint which was chosen around models, but on observed statistical
an altitude of FL100, representing winds which results in a further
a typical altitude for entering the optimization. Comprising an
TMA. The observed deviation was important Performance Based
below 10 seconds compared with Navigation (PBN) element,
what has been predicted about 20 partners to the VINGA project are
minutes earlier, well before leaving not only the typical revenue flight
the cruise level. More flight trials trial triplet consisting of the airline
will be undertaken building up (Novair), airport (Swedavia) and
confidence in the aircraft time Air Navigation Service Provider
performance, in order to start using (LFV), but also Quovadis, the PBN
it for the sake of a smooth service company. This recently
transition to the initial 4D formed Airbus subsidiary provides
operational concept of SESAR and a complete set of RNP services
NextGen. including RNP procedure design
and testing, flight operation safety
Optimization assessment, documenting air worth -
i ness compliance, training, RNP
from En-route to
monitoring, and cost-benefit ana -
En-route lysis.
VINGA (Validation and Improve - The optimization of ground
ment of Next Generation Airspace) movements is addressed in the trial
addresses all flight phases, arriving through single engine taxi-in and
6
7
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 7
DEMONSTRATING THE GREEN TRAJECTORY - FUEL EFFICIENT TRAJECTORY MANAGEMENT TESTED ON REVENUE FLIGHTS
Air Traffic Controller strips
out, whenever feasible. In case of are kept on sub-optimal lower
delays, ‘gate holding’ with engines altitudes, in favour of overflying
off will be preferred over queuing- long haul traffic. Here again, an
up on the taxiway. improved coordination between the
national ATC sectors managed by
VINGA looks also into the the French Air Navigation Service
feasibility of more flexible and Provider DGAC/DSNA was key to
efficient departure trajectories, obtain a more fuel efficient
which shall be tailored to the noise trajectory.
footprint of the individual aircraft
type. Instead of applying an unique The Green Shuttle trials which
Standard Instrument Departure were undertaken in fall 2010,
(SID), aircraft with better noise demonstrated the feasibility to
Courtesy of DFS
values shall be allowed to obtain under certain conditions
accelerate earlier to the most optimum cruising levels and more
economic climb speed and to turn direct routings, thanks also to a
earlier to the target heading. better coordination with the
i n f o r m a t i o n
military stakeholder. Continuous
Gothenburg, Sweden, could be Descent Operation (CDO) could
Quovadis
taken as representative for a typical also be demonstrated from top of
a 100% Airbus subsidiary, was
single runway regional airport and descent into both, Paris-Orly and
launched in July 2009 to support
the described measures are Toulouse. Airbus contributed with
airlines, airports, air navigation
certainly worthwhile to be studied ‘CDO fly-ability’ analysis and
service providers and authorities
in similar circumstances. advised on best speed and vertical
in Performance-Based Navigation
windows for the hand-over
(PBN) deployment, as well as to
The Green Shuttle between ATC sectors in descent.
provide related services.
Contact: Paul-Franck BIJOU
Quantified findings of the fuel
The context is more challenging in paul-franck@quovadisway.com
savings obtained in the AIRE2
the busy parts of central Europe,
exercise will be published by the
such as between the French cities
SJU through a dedicated
of Paris-Orly and Toulouse, where
dissemination event in the first half
Air France operates up to almost
of 2011. It is expected that the
50 flights a day with an A320 CONTACT DETAILS
tested ATM procedures have a
Family fleet. Although each flight
saving potential, which justifies Tom MAIER
duration is only around one hour,
their consideration in any airline’s Senior Manager CNS/ATM
three ATC En-route Sectors are Airbus Engineering
fuel saving action plan.
concerned and the shuttle flights System Sales & Marketing
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 12 45
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 41 25
thomas.t.maier@airbus.com
Conclusion
Revenue flight trials are an excellent efficient trajectory throughout the different
means to experience and adjust more flight phases. Partnerships between the
efficient Air Traffic Management (ATM) main stakeholders - airlines, Air Navigation
procedures, in a perspective to transit Service Providers and airports - is the key
smoothly to their application on a daily for improvements.
basis. Airbus in general and Quovadis The current context of ongoing major ATM
specifically for matters related to development programmes such as SESAR
Performance-Based Navigation (PBN), are and NextGen favours to challenge legacy
prepared to support revenue flight trials operations in order to migrate to more
through customer services and expertise. efficient target operational concepts,
There is a whole register of measures for which will be enabled by new
bringing a flight nearer to the most fuel technologies on-ground and on-board.
7
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE BROADCAST (ADS-B) - SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT FOR AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 8
Automatic
Dependent Surveillance
Broadcast (ADS-B)
Surveillance development
for Air Traffic Management
As air traffic is predicted to increase steadily over (ADS-B) is all about communications between
the coming years, there is a clear need to ensure aircraft, and also between aircraft and ground.
that standards of safety and efficiency are Both are vital in ensuring safe flights and
maintained, or even enhanced. This is recognized efficiency in terms of fuel use, time and
by the Single European Sky programme in Europe emissions. ADS-B is an integral part of the
(SESAR) and the NextGen programme in the planned efficiency drive towards 2020.
U.S.A. (read FAST article - Demonstrating the Taking advantage of the latest technology, ADS-B
green trajectory), the two major bodies driving the is designed to be retrofit on aircraft flying today.
Air Traffic Management (ATM) development Here, we will look at aspects associated with the
over the coming years. retrofit and take a look at the developments that
Automatic Dependent Surveillance Broadcast are planned for the future.
Christine VIGIER
Design Management Avionics
Airbus Upgrade Services
8
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 9
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE BROADCAST (ADS-B) - SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT FOR AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
ADS-B summary
In its final form, ADS-B is
designed to ease Air Traffic
Control (ATC) as the number of
approaches grows, enhancing safe-
ty and increasing airport capacity.
g l o s s a r y
In the air, the information provided
by ADS-B enhances the pilots' traf-
ADC: Air Data Computer HFDR:High Frequency Data Radio
fic awareness, allowing more opti-
ADIRS:Air Data/Inertial Reference IRS:Inertial Reference System
mal flight levels leading to fuel
System MCDU:Multi-purpose Control Display
savings.
ATC:Air Traffic Control Unit
ADS-B is considered in two parts
ATSAW: Air Traffic Situational Awareness MMR: Multi-Mode Receiver
as described:
DMC:Display Management Computer NRA: Non-Radar Airspace
EHS: Enhanced Surveillance OANC:On-board Airport Navigation
• ADS-B OUT provides a means
EIS:Electronic Instrument System Computer
of automated aircraft parameter
FCOM:Flight Crew Operating Manual OANS: On-board Airport Navigation
transmission be tween the aircraft
FM:Flight Manual System
and the ATC.
FMS:Flight Management System OMS:On-board Maintenance System
FWC:Flight Warning Computer SATCOM:Satellite Communication
• ADS-B IN provides automated
GPS:Global Positioning System SPI:Special Position Identification
aircraft parameter transmission
between aircraft themselves.
First steps involved in
ADS-B
Figure 1
ADS-B
ADS-B
Step 1: ADS-B OUT
Aircraft information
broadcasted for ground use
ADS-B
Air Traffic Control
ADS-B
receiver
Step 2: ADS-B IN (ATSAW)
Display of other aircraft ADS-B
info in the cockpit
9
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE BROADCAST (ADS-B) - SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT FOR AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 10
STEP 1: ADS-B OUT STEP 2: ADS-B IN (ATSAW)
ADS-B OUT automatically The Airbus approach to ADS-B IN
transmits aircraft parameters from is named the Air Traffic Situational
the aircraft to the ATC on ground. Awareness (ATSAW) which
There is no need for the pilot’s enables the reception of ADS-B
action and it conforms to EASA information from other aircraft in
regulations on ADS-B OUT, for the vicinity. As for the ADS-B
Non-Radar Airspace (NRA) OUT, the capability must also be
operations.The capability must be declared in the FCOM and the FM
declared in the FCOM and the FM updated (figure 4).
ADS-B OUT
shall be updated (see figure 2).
ATSAW is splited in two steps:
Figure 2
- Step 2A: ATSAW operation in
flight
DO-260 DO-260B - Step 2B: ATSAW operation on
ground
• ATC transponder enhanced
capable • ADS-B OUT DO-260B
Equipment required STEP 2A: ATSAW OPERATION IN FLIGHT
• MMR (with GPS capability) • FWC
• Wiring provision EHS
a)ATSAW
As per mandate
Availability date Now • Improves cooperationwith ATC
(refer to figure 10)
(better understanding of ATC
instructions),
• Improves the detection of
Example on MCDU
opportunities for flight level
changes in standard separation
Figure 3
for reduced fuel savings and a
In this example, the MCDU reduction of CO 2 emissions,
(Multi-purpose Control and • Improved efficiency on
Display Unit) shows the approach,
identity and the relative
• Enhances identification and
horizontal position of three
information on target aircraft,
aircraft. The pilot can see
immediately that a flight • Increases runway capacity.
level change to FL370 is not
possible until 1412Z time, b) ATSAW with ITP (In Trail
as computed by the TCAS Procedures) today defined on
(Traffic alert and Collision
the North Atlantic ocean
Avoidance System).
(see figure 3):
• Enables more frequent altitude
changes by temporarily reducing
standard separation,
• Enables flying at the optimum
flight level,
A different flight level • Provides significant fuel savings.
can be requested as
clearly indicated, taking
STEP 2B: ATSAW ON THE GROUND
into account the
surrounding aircraft
positions, trajectories • Enhanced situational awareness
and speeds. during surface operations.
10
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 11
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE BROADCAST (ADS-B) - SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT FOR AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
NEXT STEPS
ADS-B IN (ATSAW)
STEP 3: SEQUENCING AND MERGING
Figure 4
The objective of the future step
Step 2A Step 2B
is to enable the flight crews to
achieve and maintain automati-
• ATC transponder EHS
cally a given spacing with des-
• MMR (with GPS
ignated aircraft.
capability)
The two principle maneuvers As for Step 2A
Equipment required • EIS2
are 'remain behind' and 'merge + OANC
• Wiring provision
behind'.
• EHS traffic selector
The operational benefit will be
• FWC standard
the enhanced traffic regularity
during the approach to airports
Availability date Early 2011 2013 TBC
with heavy traffic allowing
increased airport capacity.
How does ADS-B
Example on Navigation
work?
Display and MCDU
ADS-B OUT
Figure 5
It uses ATC transponders to transmit
The Navigation
aircraft information to the ground, Display (ND)
using the Mode S 1090 MHz shows the aircraft
Extended Squitter with a refresh orientation and
relative
rate of 0.5 seconds.
information from
aircraft in the
vicinity.
Figure 6 Figure 7 Aircraft identification
Relative
Absolute altitude/
bearing/ Absolute
2D distance altitude
Heading/ Ground
Tracking speed
Wake vortex Vertical
category velocity
Additional information shown on the MCDU. The Pilot elects to see more information on
AFR6512 by the menu selection.
11
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE BROADCAST (ADS-B) - SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT FOR AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 12
ADS-B IN Aircraft
architecture
On aircraft, it is the TCAS computer
that receives and treats the ADS-B required for
information coming from ATC
ADS-B OUT
transponders of surrounding aircraft.
DAL 024 The information is then displayed
15 H
on the Navigation Display (ND) ADS-B OUT NEEDS
and the MCDU (see figures 5, 6 & 7).
When ATSAW is activated and if • ATC transponders at minimum
the ADS-B information is available DO-260 standard.
from aircraft in the vicinity, the • Additional wiring associated
following information is available with peripheral equipment,
for each pilot: • MMR in hybrid architecture
Figure 8 • Aircraft identification with GPS capability.
• Absolute bearing/2D distance
The ND indicates
• Heading/Tracking CURRENT FLEET STATUS
the position and
trajectory of other • Wake vortex category
aircraft on • Relative altitude/Absolute Aircraft currently flying in Europe
taxiways altitude are generally well equipped for
• Ground speed the transition to ADS-B OUT as
• Vertical velocity the prerequisite ATC transponders
Mode S (DO-260) are already
required to meet the former
enhanced surveillance mandate.
Architecture for Aircraft greater than five years of
ADS-B OUT and for ADS-B IN
age and operating outside of
Europe are more likely to need a
Figure 9
new transponder in order to
achieve ADS-B capability.
OANC ADS-B IN
Control
panel
STEP 2A
FMS
MMR • TCAS capable
• Additional wiring
Flight ID source ATC • Traffic selector in cockpit
Transponders FWC • EIS2 capable
ADC, GPS, IRS data
ADIRS
STEP 2B
Heading, Audio
Pitch, Other aircraft Step 2A + OANC
Roll,
GPS data systems (On-board Airport Navigation
Computer)
MCDU ADS-B IN TRIALS
TCAS
Capable ATSAW To pioneer and test the new func-
GPS position tions associated with ADS-B IN,
DMC/EIS trials are scheduled with the
involvement of Eurocontrol and
certain airlines which will have the
ATSAW capability, some from
Traffic
production and others by retrofit.
selector
For ADS-B IN only The European trials will com-
mence in early 2011.
12
13
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 13
AUTOMATIC DEPENDENT SURVEILLANCE BROADCAST (ADS-B) - SURVEILLANCE DEVELOPMENT FOR AIR TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT
Mandates
Figure 10
2010
DO-260
2017
2020
DO-260B
DO-260B
Date to be
determined with a D0-260
minimum standard
2013
DO-260
ADS-B OUT MANDATES standard (DO-260B) which implies
an upgrade to the FWC and con-
Current operational requirements nections between the MMR and the
or mandates are already in service ATC transponder. This will enable
and others are anticipated. The fig- additional benefits in terms of safe-
ure 10 shows areas where a man- ty, flight efficiency and situational
date already exists, such as the awareness, thanks to the GPS data
Hudson Bay, and also shows antic- enabling the transmission of more
ipated mandates in other regions. accurate information on aircraft
The upcoming mandates in Europe positions and the improved latency CONTACT DETAILS
and North America require a new in broadcasts.
Christine VIGIER
Design Management Avionics
Airbus Upgrade Services
Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 02 17
Fax: +33 (0)5 62 11 08 47
christine.vigier@airbus.com
Conclusion
Whilst the initial drivers from SESAR and ADS-B IN presents additional
NextGen are motivated by the need to opportunities for fuel and time savings,
maintain and where possible enhance in particular by the utilization of ‘In Trial
safety standards, the commercial Procedures’ for long range flights in the
implications for operators are not oceanic airspace, maintaining safety.
forgotten. The benefits from the Automatic ADS-B is in the early stages of a roadmap
Dependent Surveillance Broadcast (ADS- vision up until 2020 and has been adopted
B) are not only for Air Traffic Control (ATC), by SESAR and NextGen. Airbus Upgrade
but also for the airlines, flight crew and Services will continue to develop new
passengers. solutions to ease flight operations, thus
ADS-B OUT eases the flight crew and ATC contributing to reduce the congestion in
workload, resulting in fuel and time future Air Traffic Management.
savings thanks to more efficient
approaches.
13
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 14
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
Optical fibre
on aircraft
When the light speed serves
data transmission
As more and more electronic systems are installed Therefore, electrical installation designs
on aircraft, the quantity of electrical cable is introduced the optical fibre technology instead of
inclined to increase significantly. Aeronautical copper cables for data signal transmissions. The
electrical installations have been for many years use of optical fibre provides large benefits in
based on copper conductors which are firstly terms of a large bandwidth capacity, EMI
expensive in terms of weight and secondly, have insensibility, complete electrical isolations, signal
some constraints in relation to their characteristics attenuations lesser than electrical cables and last
such as Electro-Magnetic Interferences (EMI) and but not least, lightweight compared to an
bandwidth limitations. The introduction by Airbus electrical cable (4kg/km).
of aluminium wiring allowed saving weight but
had no better effects on the characteristic
constraints.
Stéphane BOUYSSOU
Aircraft Electrical Installation
Electrical Standard Items
Airbus Engineering
14
What is an optical
transmission
assembly?
The principle is to convert the
electrical signal to a light wave
signal, then to transmit it through a
physical pipe used as a wave guide,
so called ‘optical fibre’. Therefore,
an optical fibre transmission
assem bly is composed of a
transmitter, optical fibre, con-
nectors and a receiver (figure 1).
As a reminder, light is charac -
terized by its ‘spectrum’ which is
the whole set of wavelengths from
ultraviolet to the infrared
(including visible light) and by its
‘index of refraction (n)’ which is
an intrinsic property of a material
corresponding to the ratio between
the speed of light in vacuum and its
speed in the material. When light
encounters an environment, the
light ray is reflected and refracted.
The refracted ray (meaning
transmitted inside the medium with
a change of directions) depends on:
• The refraction index of the
parameters which are the
medium,
• The angle of the light ray
(figures 2 and 3).
This is defined per the Snell
Descartes Law: n1sinΘ1=n2sinΘ2.
Another physical phenomenon is
when an object bumps on a plane
surface, its incidence ray angle is
the same as the reflection ray
angle.
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 15
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
To date, the optical fibre application in Airbus aircraft are:
Aircraft Family A320 A330/A340 A380 A350
Cockpit Display System (CDS) •
Large displays(under development) •
Head-Up Display (HUD) • • • •
On-board Airport Navigation System (OANS) • • • •
Taxi Aid Camera System (TACS) • • •
Concentrator Multiplexing Video (CMV) •
Network Server System/On-board Information System (NSS/OIS) •
Cabin Video Monitoring System (CVMS) •
Cockpit Door Surveillance System (CDSS) •
In-Flight Entertainment (IFE) • • •
Aircraft Family A320 A330/A340 A380 A350
Cable length* Following chosen options 565 m* 2.4 km TBD
Nombre of links Following chosen options 41* 171 TBD
*average following chosen options
Optical transmission
assembly
Figure 1
Connectors
Transmitter Receiver
Electrical E Optical cable Optical cable O Electrical
signal signal
O E
Electric/Optic Optic/Electric
conversion conversion
However, it is possible to obtain a
complete reflexion (see figure 4) if
Angle of Incidence
the above both conditions are =
gathered, which will give us: Angle of Reflection
• n1 value > n2 value (n1 and n2
refraction value of both medium).
• Incident angle 1 trends towards
90° (low-angled beams).
I R
Normal point Normal point
of incidence of incidence
Incident ray Reflected ray
Figure 2
1 1 Incident ray 1 1 Reflected ray
n1 medium n1 medium
n2 medium n2 medium
General physical 2 Condition for a
behavior of the light complete reflection
Figure 3 Figure 4
Refracted ray No refracted ray
15
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 16
Optical fibre Transmitter and
receiver
An optical fibre is a wave guide
i n f o r m a t i o n allowing transmission of a
The transmitter and receiver
reflected light signal between two
Regarding optical fibre in modules are included in the
equipments. This wave guide is
telecommunication, cladding is equipment using the optical fibre
made of two basic elements which
one or more layers of material of a technology and manufactured
are the core and the cladding. Each
lower refractive index, in intimate directly by the equipment suppliers.
of them is composed of the same
contact with a core material of a
material with different refraction
higher refractive index. The The transmitter has to convert
indexes which are chosen in order
cladding causes light to be electrical data signal to light data
to have ‘ncore value > ncladding
confined to the core of the fibre by signal. The signal is specified by
value’. Then the light is transmitted
total internal reflection at the its power (<1mW) and its wave
inside the core with a low angle to
boundary between the two. length. Wave lengths used by
ensure the light wave will be totally
Airbus are 850nm and 1300nm
reflected by the cladding and trans -
(figure 7). The conversion is
mitted along the core (figure 5).
ensured by laser diodes or the
The fibre can be made out of
Light Emitting Diode (LED)
Silica or Polymer. Airbus qualified
technology. At the end of the line,
a Sili ca (glass) optical fibre
the receiver has to collect the light
P/N ABS0963-003 Type LF (see
data signal and reverse it to electric
figure 6).
Fibre data signal. This conversion is
done using the Photodiode
Figure 5 Total reflection technology.
Cladding
Optical contacts
Core n Core Silica or
Polymer and connectors
fibre
n
Cladding The optical connector is a
Light mechanical element which allows
the connection of two optical fibre
Airbus Optical Fibre
links. The optical fibre link is an
P/N ABS0963-003 LF
optical fibre fitted with contacts at
each end, allowing the installation
Figure 6
of the optical cable in a connector.
The connector implementation has
to ensure the optical signal
propagation with the minimum of
attenuation. In consequence, the
Jacket N° ELEMENTS MATERIAL DIAMETER Ø
connectors have been designed to
Core 62.5 μm ± 3 μm ensure a perfect alignment of both
Fibre Silica
Cladding 125 μm ± 2 μm optical fibre contact end faces, but
Primary coating Silicone 400 μm ± 25 μm also a constant contact between
Primary jacket Copolymer OHAL high temperature 900 μm ± 50 μm both fibres whatever the environ -
Mechanical mental conditions (figure 8).
Polymer aromatic fibre braid N/A
strength braid
Outer jacket Copolymer OHAL high temperature 1.8 μm ± 0.1 μm Two contacts, ABS1906-01 and
ABS1379-003, allowing the instal -
μm: micrometre
1.000×10−6 m = 1.0000 µm lation of optical fibre in the
Light spectrum connectors have been qualified by
Figure 7
Airbus.
Ultraviolet Visible light Infrared
400 nm 800 nm 850 nm 1300 nm
nm = nanometer
CAUTION: Even in an infrared spectrum (not visible to the eye), the light ray could cause
serious eye damage, therefore never look an optical fibre contact in front view.
16
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
The particularity of the optical
contacts, compared to electrical
contacts, is that they are
‘hermaphrodite’, meaning that the
contact is the same on both sides
of the connector. The contact
alignment is ensured by a specific
additional sleeve fitted in the
female connector.
Since the A350 design, Airbus’
philosophy is to use only
ABS1379-003 (the best one in
terms of installation facilities,
cleaning and installation on the
optical fibre) and to design
connectors in accordance with
existing supports (rectangular,
circular or square connectors, as
shown in figure 9).
Optical link
manufacturing
The manufacturing of an optical
link consists in fitting the optical
contacts on each side of the optical
fibre. This process is complex due
to some critical steps as the gluing
of the ferrule with the fibre
(contact robustness is highly
dependent of this step) or the
polishing (where the surface of the
fibre needs to be plane). In case of
a damaged optical fibre, operators
have the possibility to order a new
optical fibre link through Airbus
Spares. Depending on the
programme, the optical cable has
its own Part Number (P/N)
recorded in the Illustrated Parts
Catalogue (IPC) and retrieved
with the wire number as entry
point (A350, A380, A340 TACS),
or it is possible to request Airbus
customers support to get the P/N
associated to the wire number.
In addition, optical link
manufacturing requires some
specific tooling (oven, polish
machine, interferometer, etc.). The
on-shop process is described in the
Process and Material Specifica -
tion manual 01-05-63.
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 17
Optical fibre contact
alignment
Figure 8
skew
correct
gap lateral misalignment
Airbus optical
components
Figure 9
Contact ABS1379-003 Connector ABS1696
Connector ABS1213
Square connector EN4165
receptacle plug
Contact ABS1906-01
17
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 18
Optical fibre To prevent such attenuation, either
bobbin or tape must firstly be
installation and
applied at each attachment point of
connection on the the optical fibre installation.
Information concerning the
aircraft
installation of the optical fibre is
available in the ESPM 20-33-11
Optical fibre can be routed alone (Electrical Standard Practices
but also on a bundle with electrical Manual).
wire. Due to the optical cable
specifications (-55° to 125°C), no A major difference with the
optical cable is routed in fire or electrical wiring installations with
high temperature areas. a high impact on the optical
As for electrical wires, a minimum assembly performance concerns
bend radius has to be respected due the cleanliness of the connection.
to the light’s reflection properties. Due to the diameter of the optical
Indeed a short bend radius will fibre’s core (62.5µm, about the
modify the incidence angle of the thickness of a human hair),
light ray, thus the total reflection contamination of the optical
conditions will no longer be contact surface generates optical
respected, resulting to some attenuations or even, a complete
refraction of the light ray and loss of the signal. This is why
attenuation of the signal (figure 10). cleaning and protecting the optical
cable contact surface is mandatory
During maintenance actions on the at each step of the optical fibre
Usage of optical fibre
aircraft or during its installation handling, to avoid contamination
for In-Flight Entertainment
phase, the optical fibre should not of the contact surface (figure 11).
be crushed at the attachment point. For the cleaning, Airbus proposes
In case of over tightening, effects three techniques: Dry, wet and dry
could occur on the fibre leading to air cleaning, and two processes:
an attenuation of the signal. Contact alone or contact fitted in a
Over-bent radius effects
connector.
Figure 10
In addition, to allow the detection
of an optical contact end face
Cladding Refracted light ray contaminated, a microscope with a
minimum magnification of 200
can be used. All the above is
Core widely detailed in ESPM 20-55-60.
Optical fibre
troubleshooting
and repair
Optical fibre cleanliness
In order to ease the operator’s task
Figure 11
for the optical fibre’s malfunction
troubleshooting, some specific
tools were designed in strong
partnership with the manufacturers.
The troubleshooting is similar to
one that would be done for an
electrical cable, by performing a
continuity check. It is performed
using the Visual Fault Locator
(visible light source emitter) or a
Power Meter, with or without a
Dirty optical fibre Clean optical fibre calibrated light source (figure 12).
18
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 19
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
Extracted from the Electrical Standard
Practices Manual (ESPM 20-52-25)
To determine where the default is Figure 12
located on the optical fibre line,
the use of the Optical Time
Domain Reflectometer (OTDR) is CONNECTOR CONNECTOR CONNECTOR CONNECTOR CONNECTOR
A B C D E
the most reliable and accurate way.
The OTDR LOR220, using the EMITTING
LIGHT OPTICAL FIBRE UNDER TEST
photon counting method (see the VFL/VLC
information box below), was OPTICAL CONTINUITY TEST CONNECTION METHOD
specifically designed by Luciol
Instruments to provide high TEST LEAD TEST LEAD
CONNECTOR
precision measures in the aircraft
SYSTEM
environment and can be used on /
EQUIPMENT
wing.
CONNECTOR CONNECTOR CONNECTOR CONNECTOR CONNECTOR POWER
A B C D E METER
With one screenshot, the tool OPTICAL POWER MEASUREMENT TEST CONNECTION METHOD
provides a curve showing the
optical signal’s attenuation at each
TEST LEAD TEST LEAD TEST LEAD TEST LEAD
distance point of the cable. By CONNECTOR CONNECTOR
such, it is possible to find with
high accuracy where the damage is
LIGHT CONNECTOR CONNECTOR POWER
localized on the line in order to SOURCE A E METER
perform the repair. INSERTION LOSS TEST CONNECTION METHOD
The displayed result curve (figure
13) allows to make the difference
between the return loss (light
reflection due to the optical line
cut-off at the level of the i n f o r m a t i o n
connectors) and the insertion loss
In physics, a photon is an
(signal attenuation resulting of the
elementary particle, the quantum
defect on the line). The OTDR of the electromagnetic interaction
offers the possibility to record the and the basic unit of light and all
curve, allowing the operator to other forms of electromagnetic
radiation.
send the curve directly to Airbus
specialists for interpretation.
Airbus broken optical fibre can be
repaired. Airbus qualified a
specific tooling developed by the
Optical Time Domain Reflectometer
manufacturer Diamonds allowing
(OTDR) screenshot
this kind of repairs called the
‘Fusion Splice’ which uses the Figure 13
fusion technology.
An electrical arc is generated
welding two optical fibre ends
facing each other (figure 14). The
result is a complete continuity of
the fibre. The tool kit contains also
a ‘tension test’ system, checking
the correct fusion of the cable. A
kind of protective sleeve P/N
ABS1632-003 - called ‘crocodile’
in relation to its shape and
specifically designed for this
application - is then glued on the
splice to ensure a mechanical
protection.
19
OPTICAL FIBRE ON AIRCRAFT - WHEN THE LIGHT SPEED SERVES DATA TRANSMISSION
CONTACT DETAILS
Stéphane BOUYSSOU
Aircraft Electrical Installation
Electrical Standard Items
Airbus Engineering
Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 55 75
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 93 44 25
stephane.bouyssou@airbus.com
Conclusion
In the recent past years, the optical fibre faces to be scrupulously clean. The
was introduced in the aeronautics. This continuous development of the optical
has required to develop components and fibre’s use in the aeronautics requires new
associated processes/methods to skills and competences for an airline
maintain them during the aircraft’s life- electrician, likely to work on the systems
cycle, like any other previous copper or using optical fibre.
aluminium electrical cables. In the coming A specific training course (Optical Fibre
years, no doubt that continuous Inter-System Code XMOF) dedicated to
improvements and further developments optical fibre troubleshooting and
will come to light. maintenance has been developed by
The principles of optical fibre installations Airbus and will be available beginning of
are similar to other technologies, copper 2011 in the Airbus Training e-Catalogue.
and aluminium, but require the optical
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:19 Page 20
This permanent repair restores the plate, etc.) and the material
full integrity and characteristics of necessary to perform the repair on-
the optical cable (losses introduced wing.
by the ‘Fusion Splice’ are less than
0.1dB). You may find information
Fusion Splice technology concerning the repair of an optical
A complete kit P/N 1047320 cable in the ESPM 20-53-28, but
Figure 14 (figure 15) was designed also available in Airbus SIL
containing the Fusion Splice tools 20-030.
including the complete gear
(pliers, scissors, light, support
On-wing repair kit
Figure 15
20
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 21
A300/A310 FAMILY OPTIMIZED AIR-VENT INLET NACA DUCT- CONTINUOUS ENGINEERING SOLUTIONS FOR FUEL SAVINGS
A300/A310 Family
optimized air-vent inlet
NACA Duct
Continuous engineering solutions
for fuel savings
Fuel economy has always been a concern for the potential hardware improvements which would
operators, particularly with the increase in oil give a better fuel economy to its operators. Such
prices in recent years and global awareness for the improvements need to be attractive to operators
environment. Airbus has been working with the and be capable for retrofit, with a quick return on
operators to look for ways to improve fuel investment. The improved NACA Duct described
economy for all its aircraft programmes. For the in this article reduces drag, thus improving the
A300/A310 Family programme, despite no longer aircraft’s fuel consumption.
being in production, Airbus has been looking into
Charles VALE Hannah RINGROW
Site Chief Engineer Continuous Product Development
A300/A310 Programme Project Leader
Airbus Operations A300/A310 Programme
Airbus Operations
21
A300/A310 FAMILY OPTIMIZED AIR-VENT INLET NACA DUCT- CONTINUOUS ENGINEERING SOLUTIONS FOR FUEL SAVINGS
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 22
In-service Meeting these design objectives
NACA Duct location
ensures that the structural loads are
on the wing experience
kept to a minimum and therefore
allow for a lighter wing. Maintai-
Figure 1
ning the original design loads is
Based on the A320 and A330/A340
essential to avoid any further
Family programmes, improve -
modifications to the wing struc ture.
ments have been studied to reduce
For the A300/A310 Family
aerodynamic drag through the
programme modification, we have
introduction of a new NACA Duct.
taken benefit from previous tes -
The A300/A310 Family
tings carried out on other Airbus
programme team launched an
programmes including on the fuel
activity to optimize its own, but
rig, the wind tunnel and flight tests
with the constraint of a minimal
(figure 3), thereby minimizing the
impact to the structure and a
cost of development and
minimal installation time.
qualification.
Fuel system
Aerodynamic
requirements
Current A310 NACA Duct, view optimization of the
from underneath the wing
air-vent inlet NACA
The NACA Duct is located near the
Figure 2 Duct
wing tip, and counts one per wing
(see figures 1 and 2). As an air
inlet, the NACA Duct ensures that
Using knowledge gained from the
the differential pressure between
optimization of other Airbus
the interior of the fuel tanks and
aircraft families, a new aerodyna -
the outside atmospheric pressure is
mic shape was created, which
kept to a minimum, particularly
differs from the old shape
during climb and descent - the
particularly on the rear face of the
emergency descent being the most
insert see figures 4 and 5. This new
severe design case.
insert still satisfies the fuel system
As a fuel vent system outlet, the
requirements. The resulting drag
NACA Duct is sized to permit fuel
reduction is 0.3% of the total aircraft
flow overboard in the event of an
drag, leading to an approximate fuel
automatic refuel failure.
saving of 20-30kg per flight.
Flight test set-up for A340 Inverted NACA Duct
aerodynamic supplement Inset installation
Figure 3 Figure 4
Current
NACA Duct
Flow cones is retained
Camera
Rake
Improved NACA Duct is
achieved by fixing the
new machined insert to
the exterior of the
current NACA Duct
22
23
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 23
A300/A310 FAMILY OPTIMIZED AIR-VENT INLET NACA DUCT- CONTINUOUS ENGINEERING SOLUTIONS FOR FUEL SAVINGS
Industrialization
NACA Duct with insert top view
and cross-sectional profile
Several options were considered Aerodynamic supplement
Figure 5
including a multi-part design. The
chosen modifica tion is a single
one-piece machined insert which is
attached externally with new
fasteners to the existing NACA
A310 fuel vent
Duct. This means that the current
Insert
NACA Duct does not need to be
removed, minimizing the
embodiment time for the retrofit
solution. The complete retrofit can
be achieved in eight hours elapsed
time. This modification is fully
Insert Insert A310 Insert
inter-chan geable and requires no
ramp inlet 'Letterbox' rear
additional parts to be modified. inlet face
The original shape of the
NACA Duct was analyzed and
considered to be less than optimal,
as put in evidence by flight tests
performed on the A340.
The new shape of the
NACA Duct was developed using
analysis and testing to demonstrate
the reduction in drag while
maintaining a similar pressure
differential. The benefit in the new Line-of-flight section through the A310 fuel vent
shape results in the design changes and geometry insert
brought to the rear face, from
concave to convex of the inlet. This Airflow
Concave
improves the flow aft of the inlet
new design
and therefore reduces the drag.
In addition, the frontal area of the
duct is reduced which also
contributes to the reduction in drag.
Convex
original shape
i n f o r m a t i o n
A NACA Duct, also sometimes called a NACA Scoop
CONTACT DETAILS
or NACA Inlet, is a common form of low-drag air
Hannah RINGROW
inlet design, originally developed by the U.S. National
Charles VALE Continuous Product Development
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA), the Site Chief Engineer Project Leader
precursor to NASA, in 1945. A300/A310 Programme A300/A310 Programme
Airbus Operations Airbus Operations
Tel: +44 11 79 36 65 79 Tel: +44 11 79 36 04 74
Fax: +44 11 79 36 56 07 Fax: +44 11 79 36 56 07
charles.vale@airbus.com hannah.k.ringrow@airbus.com
Conclusion
The newly designed NACA Duct has taken installation time for retrofit to the
advantage of the improvements made on A300/A310 Family programme. The
other Airbus programmes and has been benefit to the operator is fuel savings with
adapted to minimise the cost of parts and a short payback period (2 to 2,5 years).
23
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 24
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) - AIRBUS BUSINESS RADAR
Radio Frequency
Identification (RFID)
Airbus business radar
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is a form In the 1980’s and 1990’s, the use of RFID was
of Automatic Identification (Auto-ID) that uses a often associated with building access control,
small wireless device that can be attached to automatic payments for road charges at toll
objects or parts. It provides an accurate, automatic booths and animal tracking. Today, as a result of
and a fast way to record and collect information massive advances in the technology’s maturity,
about the object’s or part’s business activities. For RFID is recognized as a fundamental enabler to
example, you can automatically track the streamline business processes, reduce inventory
confirmation of deliveries into a warehouse, data and increase the productivity and quality of
can be written and stored onto the device in large business operations. Consequently, companies
quantities if required, and then can be read taking advantage of such capabilities can very
automatically from a distance with an RFID quickly develop a competitive edge.
reader.
Carlo K. NIZAM Paul-Antoine CALANDREAU Jamil KHALIL
Head of Value Chain Visibility Flyable RFID Project Manager Head of Sourcing
and Auto-ID Programme Value Chain Visibility and EADS Coordination
Airbus Information, and Auto-ID Value Chain Visibility
Communication & Technology Airbus ICT and Auto-ID
Airbus ICT
24
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 25
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) - AIRBUS BUSINESS RADAR
The history of
Airbus business radar: A digital
RFID in Airbus Fly-By-Wire view of reality
Airbus recognized this advantage
early on and as part of its mantra Supply Chain
for ‘Non Stop Innovation’, started & Warehouse Logistics
piloting the technology as early as
the year 2000, across its tool loans Repair Process Closed Loop
with airlines. By 2006, there were Optimisation Asset Tracking
15 projects across Airbus, each
looking at promising new benefits
enabled by RFID. However, it was Cabin Airbus Transport
clear that to maximize the benefits Operations Network
across the company, a coordinated
approach was needed to avoid
duplication of activities and to Configuration Internal Asset
Management Tracking
maximize synergies.
Manufacturing
As a consequence, in 2007, a & Assembly
corporate decision was taken to
launch a company-wide program -
me to increase visibility across the
lifecycle of the aircraft, using a Why increase visibility?
Why RFID?
collection of automatic identi-
fication technologies (inclu ding
RFID). This was called the Value
Chain Visibility (VCV) program - RFID, bar codes, etc. Accurate and
efficient information
me. A dedicated transver sal team
was established to chart a company Quick wins Visibility Information about
strategy, develop the optimum use through data working, not working
automation
of the technology and consoli -
date/prioritize activities across the Measurability Where is it
working, not working?
company.
Long term wins
through continuous Business process Improve the way
The Value Chain process of working
improvement
Visibility
Business savings EBIT, cash,
programme cost avoidance
The VCV programme is an Auto-ID The VCV programme is providing
inspired business transforma tion Airbus, its industrial partners and
programme that is developing its customers with real-time
state-of-the-art streamlined busi - automated visibility of processes,
ness processes across the value materials/asset movements and
chain through increased visibility other key business events. By
and measurability. Its scope is the doing so, we move away from an
Airbus value chain, from suppliers analogue and paper-based value
to Airbus, between the global chain to what we call the “Digital
Airbus manufacturing sites onto Fly-By-Wire” value chain.
airline customers and in-service
partners.
25
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) - AIRBUS BUSINESS RADAR
The business the more measurability and control
it can have on its processes which
radar concept
in turn, help improve those
processes which translate into
savings and quality improvements.
This may seem like a radical
concept at first glance, but the
Radio Frequency Identification
following comparison illustrates
(RFID) helps us adopt the same
the potential benefits of the
principle in the same way that
industrial Fly-By-Wire value chain
radar sensors provide visibility to
and Airbus’ business radar concept.
airports. It is our ‘business radar’
that lets us see what is going on
Airports use radar sensors (that use
digitally, automatically and in real
radio frequencies) to automatically
time, so we can optimize the way
track what is going on, in real-time.
we work and make the right
All the information from the radar
decisions faster.
sensors feed into the air traffic
control system that informs the air
The Value Chain
traffic controllers what is
happening, so they can make the approach
right decisions faster. In other
words, they have real-time
visibility and measurability. Airbus does not wish to limit the
benefits of this improvement
For airport and air traffic initiative to one specific function
controllers, the benefits are (e.g. logistics) or even itself. This is
extremely clear. Without that level because Airbus considers its value
of visibility, without real-time chain to effectively be ‘profits in
updates and without this motion’. These profits are not
automation, it would be extremely limited to any particular function
difficult to manage the skies but are spread all along it; the same
efficiently and prevent incidents, being true for costs. Costs arise
given today’s volume of air traffic. from waste that does not
distinguish itself between functions,
The same is true for a global nor limits itself to company
industrial company that has tens of boundaries. So Airbus is focusing
Tool tracking with RFID
thousands moving parts albeit the on the big lifecycle picture in order
ground. The more visibility a to make the big savings and
company has into its operations, develop an approach that
Visibility, measurability and maximizes the benefits to all actors
savings. They are all connected.
across the value chain.
Due to the large scale of this
lifecycle based approach, the VCV
Automated visibility programme is split into two main
with high level categories which are the ‘Non-
of measurability (e.g. RFID)
Flyable’ and ‘Flyable’. The ‘Non-
Flyable’ category refers to all the
ground-based processes and includes
Semi-automated visibility the supply chain, transportation,
Improved accuracy Improved business
control efficiency of processes w (e i . t g h . i b n a c r r e c a o s d e e d ) measurability savings logistics, manufacturing and
assembly related applications. The
‘Flyable’ category refers to all in-
service processes and includes
Manual based visibility
with low measurability operational, maintenance and payload
(e.g. manual data entry)
tracking applications.
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 26
26
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 27
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) - AIRBUS BUSINESS RADAR
Value chain visibility & Auto-ID:
Total lifecycle traceability
Within each category, there is a
portfolio of new streamlined
processes that span the lifecycle of
Value Chain Visibility and Auto-ID Programme
the aircraft. These processes were
first piloted in an individual Airbus Non-flyable Flyable
business location and then once
proven, are repeatedly deployed on
Release 1 Release 2 Release 3
a large scale across the company.
In this way, we re-use and
Logistic Distribution Manufacture Assembly Lifecycle of parts Cargo
standardize both, the new process
Supply chain tracking Global transportation Cabin configuration
and solutions across the company.
(3PL Centre, Toulouse) (Beluga Transport, Hamburg Station) (Airline 1)
It is effectively process
harmonization with a top down
Warehouse logistics Work In progress Repair Shop processes
strategy, but executed in a bottom-
(3PL Centre, Toulouse) (A380 Hamburg, St Nazaire, Broughton) (Airline 2)
up fashion.
• Non-Flyable:
Inventory management Tool tracking/Calibration Spares logistics/ FHS
So far, Airbus has deployed (A380 FAL, Toulouse) (A380+A400M Assembly, Filton/Hamburg) (Airline 3)
almost 20 industrial projects in
the ‘Non Flyable’ category that Distribution tracking Configuration Management Payload tracking
range from warehouse logistics (A380 FAL, Hamburg) (A330/A340 FAL, Toulouse) (Airline 4)
to tooling management, to the
work in progress tracking. All 3PL: Third Party Logistics
FAL: Final Assembly Line
these projects, without
A350 XWB
exception, have shown very
strong financial benefits in the
order of millions of Euros per As a result of this analysis, Airbus RFID tracking process from 'A to Z'
year, with pay back periods in became the first aircraft
most cases of less than one year. manufacturer to request its
The tangible benefits induced by suppliers to add permanent RFID
the higher level of automation tags to approximately 3,000 parts
include a reduction in inventory on each of its new A350 XWB
and capital assets, improved aircraft. These RFID tags are
productivity and quality. designed to remain with the parts
• Flyable: throughout their entire lifecycle,
In March 2006, a two day RFID in order to enable process
specific Customer Focus Group automation and enhance the
was held with 34 airlines and process visibility for airlines,
MRO (Maintenance, Repair & suppliers and MRO organisations.
Overhaul) organisation
participants. Airbus presented its For example, consider the line side
ideas and the attendees provided maintenance domain. When a
feedback and their view of mechanic replaces a faulty unit
priorities. Their inputs have with a replacement unit, he will be
formed the cornerstone of the able to digitally scan the faulty and
‘Flyable’ project. replacement units in order to
complete his work order via a
The results from an opportunity mobile RFID handheld reader. He
and pilot analysis across a range of will also be able to remotely
in-service processes with key upload this information into his
airlines and MRO partners were Maintenance Information System
found to be better than expected. (MIS) without the need to fill in
All the projects had a payback any paperwork and later type it into
period of less than 12 months with his MIS. As a result, the overall
medium to strong savings. But one process is much faster, the quality
of the critical enablers for these of data in the databases
savings was the high memory UHF significantly improved and there is
(Ultra-High Frequency) passive less administrative work.
RFID tags on parts.
27
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) - AIRBUS BUSINESS RADAR
74
TSAF
External services
n o t e s A successful example is the
collaboration with Air Portugal’s
If you would like further details
Airbus has been approached by a Maintenance and Engineering (TAP
about what Airbus is doing and
number of companies, both in M&E) department in Lisbon,
how RFID can benefit your
aerospace and outside, for support Portugal. TAP M&E and Airbus’
company, please contact us. We
on RFID projects. Part of the added team jointly studied and deployed a
would be more than happy to invite
value is clearly to benefit from the RFID solution for tracking parts in an
you to our Value Chain Visibility
first hand experience of the Airbus engine repair shop. Work is now on-
industrial showroom in Toulouse,
team and the proven portfolio of going to expand to two additional
France, where you can touch and
processes and solutions that have areas of TAP M&E's tracking
see firsthand how Airbus is using
already been deployed within operations (for tooling and life-
the technology to deliver
Airbus’ industrial environment. vests).
improvements and savings across
its global manufacturing sites.
Lean
b
e
u
r
s
a
i
n
n
d
e s
m
s
o
p
r
r
e
o
c
c
o
es
m
s
p
e
e
s
titive
RFID
Process monitoring
28
emit
laeR
noitamotuA
gnitroper
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 28
RFID + process monitoring:
Enables process improvement
Productivity
Cycle time
Quality
+ =
Identify variations
Process optimisation
Automated alerts
i n f o r m a t i o n
The theory behind the not our end destination. The destination improved and is therefore an enabler
benefits is fully automated and real-time for continuous improvement
visibility and monitoring of our business
Visibility, measurability and business processes. RFID is one of the main How does RFID achieve this?
savings: They are all connected. vehicles that can help us reach this Firstly, RFID helps automate processes
All business savings come from goal. by removing the need to manually (via
process improvements. But we can’t paper or bar code) track the progress
improve what we can’t measure. And What are the benefits? of a business process. This helps
we can’t measure what we can’t see There are two categories of benefits accelerate the process, reduce the
(i.e., visibility). short and long term. cycle times and makes it more lean.
So visibility is a pre-requisite for all In the short term, RFID helps us Secondly, RFID enables long term
business savings. Furthermore, the automate processes. Automation: improvements by allowing us to
level of visibility and in an organisation a)Improves productivity, automatically “see” in real-time how
determines the maximum level of b)Makes processes faster which our processes are actually performing.
savings (i.e., if you can see so much, reduces cycle times and inventories, If we then compare the actual
you can only measure so much, only c)Helps avoid manual errors which performance against our target
improve so much and only save so therefore improves quality. So overall performance, we can see very quickly
much). faster processes, less inventory, less what is working and what is not. This
RFID helps us see more, measure efforts and better quality. helps us identify where we need to
more, improve more and save more. In the long term, RFID can help identify take corrective actions in order to focus
But while RFID is very important, it is areas where processes can be our improvement processes.
29
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 29
RADIO FREQUENCY IDENTIFICATION (RFID) - AIRBUS BUSINESS RADAR
Other EADS
companies From left to right:
Clive HOHBERGER
Chairman Automatic Identification
and Mobility (AIM)
The solid RFID successes within
Airbus, together with the spirit of Carlo K. NIZAM
innovation across the EADS group Head of Value Chain Visibility & Auto-ID
Airbus
(of which Airbus is one company),
has resulted in companies within
Dr. Patrick KING
all the group are also interested in Global Electronics Strategist
using RFID to enable savings. So, Michelin
in order to capitalize on the
experience and lessons learnt, the
Airbus employee receives and Mobility (AIM) which is the
different companies within the
the highest award for international global association for
EADS group are re-using and
Radio Frequency automatic identification and mobility
building on the past of Airbus’
Identification (RFID) technology. AIM was particularly
RFID work.
activities impressed with Airbus’ wide vision for
RFID and how far and fast Airbus had
Carlo K. NIZAM received the pushed the boundaries for the
distinguished Don Percival award in application of the technology.
recognition of his outstanding “To be recognised by your own
contribution to the advancement of company is one thing,” Carlo says. “To
Automatic Identification (Auto-ID) be recognised by the Auto-ID industry
solutions at the AIM conference in as a whole as best-in-class takes it to
November 2010 in Chicago, U.S.A. another level”.
The award was handed over by the
Association for Automatic Identification
CONTACT DETAILS
Carlo K. NIZAM Paul-Antoine CALANDREAU Jamil KHALIL
Head of Value Chain Flyable RFID Project Head of Sourcing
Visibility Manager and EADS Coordination
& Auto-ID Programme Value Chain Visibility & Value Chain Visibility &
Airbus Information, Auto-ID Auto-ID
Communication & Airbus ICT Airbus ICT
Technology Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 18 22 Tel: +33 (0)5 61 18 78 05
Tel: +33 (0)5 67 19 35 61 Fax: +33 (0)5 61 30 00 79 Fax: +33 (0)5 61 30 00 79
Fax: +33 (0)5 61 30 00 79 paul-antoine.calandreau jamil.khalil@airbus.com
carlo.nizam@airbus.com @airbus.com
Conclusion
Airbus is using RFID as a ‘business radar’ and solutions. The new A350 XWB aircraft
to improve its business processes through will embed RFID capabilities from day one
better visibility and taking a lifecycle on 3000 of its parts and be able to take
based approach through a single advantage of the portfolio of processes
corporate programme, that aims to that have already been developed. Airbus
maximize benefits to all actors across the is ready to support its airline customers
value chain. As part of this lifecycle based and industrial partners to benefit from its
approach, Airbus has developed and proven industrial experiences.
deployed a full portfolio of RFID processes
29
ENHANCED SPARE PART ENGINEERING SUPPORT - SMART DESIGN OF SPARE PARTS FOR A PART STANDARDISATION
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 30
Enhanced spare
part engineering support
Smart spare parts' design for
a part standardisation
The Airbus Material and Logistics Engineering Its approach to engineering solutions for material
team has developed the capability to create and logistics requirements and the services it
efficient engineering solutions for the design of provides to the customers includes the initiation
spare parts, maximizing their standardisation and and drive of standardisation and modular designs
harmonisation. Airbus defines innovative spare of spare parts, for the Airbus spares’ aftermarket.
part solutions leading to improved part delivery The service also aims to provide new
lead times, based on the combination of standardized part numbers and lead-time
engineering expertise with the material and solutions based on customer requests. This article
logistics business experience. will explain the advantages and future of inter-
changeability between spare parts.
Tanja BUCHHOLZ Andy J. MASON Kay JASCHOB
Manager Material and Logistics Engineering Material and Logistics Engineer Material and Logistics Engineer
Airbus Material Logistics Airbus Material Logistics Airbus Material Logistics
& Suppliers & Suppliers & Suppliers
30
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 31
ENHANCED SPARE PART ENGINEERING SUPPORT - SMART DESIGN OF SPARE PARTS FOR A PART STANDARDISATION
A typical case
for the Material
Figure 1
and Logistics
Engineering
support
When a component fails on an
aircraft, the usual assumption is
that this occurs due to fatigue,
static loading, wear, corrosion or
other influences which aircraft
components are subject to. The
immediate solution to allow the Dado Panel
aircraft to continue its operations is (Lower sidewall panel)
always to replace the part,
particularly when its essentiality
code is ‘1’ or ‘No-Go’, meaning
the aircraft is not airworthy without
the part. Airbus has experienced
many cases where the root cause is Some customers use a light grey
not based solely on the part itself, colour, others a sand-colour, i n f o r m a t i o n
but on various other external amongst the various other shades
Inter-changeability:
factors such as maintenance available. In this case, we looked
handling or on the installation and into the various opportunities to Parts are inter-changeable (INC)
transportation. Once identified, the reduce the replacement lead-time, when they are equal in form, fit
global issues can be solved faster whilst maintaining the integrity of and function. There are three main
and more cost-efficiently, compa - the business, airworthiness and types:
red to the time and cost of a part re- safety to fulfil the customers’ • INC1 (cid:2)One way inter-
design. require ments. changeable: New parts can
A recent customer query regarding The only economically viable replace old; old ones cannot
the lead-time for A340 aircraft solution was to deliver semi- replace new parts.
cabin lower sidewall panels, finished panels, requiring the • INC2 (cid:2)Fully inter-changeable:
commonly named ‘Dado Panels’, customer to add the coating on-site Old parts can replace the new
highlighted this point (figure 1). but enabling him to operate his parts which can replace old
Due to the fact that cabin lower aircraft quickly. This bypassed the parts
sidewall panels are highly customisation issue and greatly • INC3 (cid:2)Not inter-changeable.
customized to the specific improved the lead-time.
Mixability:
requirements of the customer’s
cabin design, the specific The following two prerequisites Parts are mixable when different
production lead times can be are required to be able to add the modification standards can be
relatively high. Lower sidewall lower sidewall panel coatings on- installed at the same time, in
panels are finished by applying a site: different locations, within a given
film rendering the surface with the • An autoclave for the curing system.
final colour and pattern for the process,
cabin interior, specific to each • The qualification to perform the
customers’ cabin specifications. curing processes.
31
ENHANCED SPARE PART ENGINEERING SUPPORT - SMART DESIGN OF SPARE PARTS FOR A PART STANDARDISATION
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 32
There are various maintenance a personal selection of a maintenance
facilities and external providers provider for the customisation work.
which fulfil these requirements
and satisfy external aftermarket In this particular case, the solutions
needs. These are able to apply such resulting from the analysis carried
coatings to internal Airbus out highlighted the additional
proprietary panels. added value provided by the Airbus
Material and Logistics Engineering
Once Airbus had followed up the team's inputs when tackling such
‘Dado panel’ case, an internal in-service root cause analysis.
initiative was launched to create a There are many areas where
new official Part Number (P/N) combining experience of
defining a standard procurable engineering processes and
‘non-coated’ version of the ‘Dado procedures within Airbus with the
panel’. This has been phased-in ‘logistics and spares’ expertise can
with the respective inter- lead to efficient trouble-shooting
changeability (ICY) links to the and the determination of the real
customised ‘Dado panel’ variants root causes, particularly when only
displayed in the customer's indirectly design-related. The
Illustrated Parts Catalogue (IPC). Material and Logistics Engineering
Airbus customers can now order a team has been established in 2007
non-customised part, greatly in Airbus to address and solve such
reducing the lead-time, whilst topics.
giving the freedom to drive a
cost/lead-time balance through
The Airbus Material and Logistics
Engineering team way forward
Objectives Approach
• React in case of Aircraft-On-Ground (AOG) with more Existing parts
flexibility based on intelligent spares solutions. • Initiation of design changes to
• Improve the part usability by ensuring specific market existing parts, creating spares which
spare parts' inter-changeability (ICY), are far more flexible, covering
- Production ICY - Defining which systems are installed multiple applications and complete
on the production aircraft. P/N families.
- Spares ICY - Connecting parts indirectly inter- • Reorientation of ICY codes to
changeable through chains of modifications. expand the usability of parts and to
- Specific spares ICY - Allowing the customer to choose optimize the effectivity scope of
whether to use new systems installed in production. P/Ns, as for spares a P/N can be
• Increase operational flexibility allowing increased effective through an ICY link.
regional parts’ availability:
- Reduce Part Number (P/N) variance in storage New parts
warehouses, whilst covering the fleet requirements. • Ensure that design changes are
- Same P/Ns serve more customers. carried out allowing the new parts to
- Increased regional availability due to increased scope be inter-changeable where possible
per Part Number. and initiating the creation of a
• Reduce lead times: separate, fully interchangeable
- Standardized designs and parts. spares’ solution.
- Highly structured product lines and streamlined
processes.
32
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 33
ENHANCED SPARE PART ENGINEERING SUPPORT - SMART DESIGN OF SPARE PARTS FOR A PART STANDARDISATION
Current work and
The Geared Rotary Actuator
principles inter-changeability on an A340 wing
Figure 2
The aircraft configuration in
service today is the product of
trade-offs between various
specialists and innovative design
solutions. To give an example, the
aerodynamic design of the wing
must be adapted to accommodate
the structural requirements, and the
structural design must be adapted
to allow the required aerodynamic
wing shape. Another important
trade-off in aerospace design is the
one between the in-service
performance of particular aircraft
parts and the spares logistics’
requirements, such as mixability,
inter-changeability and transporta-
bility. One standardized part
performing the same task in two
different locations is clearly more
cost effective than designing two
different parts to perform two only
very slightly different tasks.
An efficient design must meet the
operation's philosophy enabling The design philosophy that Airbus
Harmonisation
the standardisation of parts, is developing has been incor- and standardisation:
ensuring the highest degree of porated already for parts to other Part ´B´ harmonized
standardisation and its inter- Airbus family aircraft. For the first the functions of 5055CV,
5044CV and 5009CV
changeability. The wing of an time, it is also being incorporated
as the same part
A340 aircraft, is already an into the A350XWB programme
can be used in all
existing example of standardi- and will benefit all future three locations.
sation to explain this principle. The programmes.
Geared Rotary Actuator (shown as
part ‘B’ in figure 2) can be used in Initial and
two separate locations. The benefit
long term
of this is that one spare part covers
both applications, allowing a importance of
greater flexibility and leaner
inter-changeability
warehouse stocks.
Airbus Material and Logistics Design evolutions are important
Engineering team is working to for continued airworthiness, safety
identify all areas where different and the technical advancement of
parts are similar in form, fit and Airbus aircraft programmes which
function, to standardize parts and keeps us at the forefront of
thus, to increase flexibility. The technology. Whilst it is important
incorporation of service require - to ensure the maturity of aircraft
ments throughout the life cycle, through continuous improvements,
issues into the design process and the inter-changeability is
the ongoing product development paramount, as for large expensive
decisions for several parts in the components it can have a huge
A380 aircraft proves the validity of positive impact on lead times.
the concept.
33
ENHANCED SPARE PART ENGINEERING SUPPORT - SMART DESIGN OF SPARE PARTS FOR A PART STANDARDISATION
Airbus Material and Logistics throughout the aircraft lifecycle as
Engineering team is not just the pre-mod spares must continue
looking at the technical perfor - to be produced and stocked by
mance of the part, but is applying a customers, suppliers and Airbus
particular focus on the inter- (figure 3).
changeability (ICY) and main-
tainability of the part. This is to Material and
secure lead times and the future
Logistics
AOG (Aircraft-On-Ground) per -
forman ces and will allow Airbus to Engineering
apply the lessons learnt from
solution
current projects to all future
programmes. The long term impact
of non inter-changeability (when
We initiate and facilitate the
design changes are carried out and
creation of new engineering
the new solution is not inter chan -
solutions by working together with
geable with the old solution) is that
system specialists, allowing
the pre-mod fleet cannot be
product developments to be inter-
provisio ned with post-mod spares.
changeable, without compromising
This can lead to challenges
their technical excellence.
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 34
i n f o r m a t i o n
Benefits for Airbus
customers
• Flexibility for high priority
demands:
- Parts can be used
for numerous applications
- Reduced Part Number variance
in warehouses whilst fully
covering fleet requirements
• Shorter lead times and less
complexity:
- Modular design and spare part
flexibility allows a lower
inventory to cover the same
fleet size, reducing complexity
for Airbus operators’ fleets
and maintenance customers
- The resulting budget savings
allow re-investment in greater
regional availability worldwide
Spare parts engineering
• Inventory reduction due to
without inter-changeability
reduced number of standards:
- Focussing on full inter-
Figure 3
changeability will allow Airbus
to ensure the optimum Current design
and configuration
progression of its product
developments, whilst retaining
Old fleet not covered
simplicity and clarity of required by new part-more
spares required
spare parts thus driving
operational efficiency and New Design change:
New design solution
excellence. spare part notinter-changeable
Larger warehouse stock
required to ensure
the dispatch reliability
Future flying fleet
Spare parts engineering
Current design
with inter-changeability
and configuration
New Design change:
spare part New design solution
isinter-changeable
for spares
Maximized
inter-changeability
throughout full aircraft cycle
34
35
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 35
ENHANCED SPARE PART ENGINEERING SUPPORT - SMART DESIGN OF SPARE PARTS FOR A PART STANDARDISATION
Future activities: How to access
Technical stock the support?
optimisation
services Airbus Material and Logistics
Engineering team’s principle
objective is to ensure that efforts are
The processes Airbus is currently
focussed on the parts which affect
developing to optimize its
its customers the most, in terms of
warehouses, will show benefits in
technical warehouse optimisation,
terms of tailoring service goals,
inter-changeability and material
enhanced regional availability and
planning. Airbus is available to cater
operational flexibility. Airbus
to your material and logistics
intends to allow applications also
aftermarket require ments.
to customers’ spares warehouses.
Looking towards the future, Airbus
will be able to provide a technically
orientated warehouse optimisation
service, based on in-depth analysis n o t e s
with an initial focus on large,
In the frame of Airbus consulting services,
complex and high value parts.
Airbus offers two services addressing mate-
These are analysed based on
rial and logistics’ optimisation:
consumption (essentiality),
• Inventory review:
depreciation and risk, allowing a
- Optimisation of inventory levels,
rigorous and firm decision process
- Analysis of distribution of spares
to identify candidates for
within the flight network
elimination.
- Support of preparation for fleet increase.
This will extend the scope of
• Process efficiency review based on lean
Airbus’ current inventory consul -
principles:
ting services, moving it to the next
- Increase of process efficiency
level of service excellence and will
and output
include the following:
- Identification and elimination
• Inventory optimisation
of waste.
recommendations
• Special offers
• How to attract buyers CONTACT DETAILS Andy J. MASON
• When to scrap parts Material and Logistics Engineer
Tanja BUCHHOLZ Airbus Material,
• When does it make sense to
Manager Material and Logistics Logistics and Suppliers
modify/upgrade parts.
Engineering Tel: +49 (0)40 50 76 24 34
Airbus Material, Fax: +49 (0)40 50 76 28 29
Logistics and Suppliers andrew.j.mason@airbus.com
Tel: +49 (0)40 50 76 24 31
Kay JASCHOB
Fax: +49 (0)40 50 76 28 29
Material and Logistics Engineer
tanja.buchholz@airbus.com
Airbus Material,
Logistics and Suppliers
Tel: +49 (0)40 50 76 24 32
Fax: +49 (0)40 50 76 28 29
Conclusion kay.jaschob@airbus.com
The Material and Logistics Engineering The Material and Logistics Engineering
team is building up knowledge and team is the focal point within Airbus for
experience to support its customers in the issues relating to the design of spare
resolution of material and logistics issues parts, specifically for logistics, aftermarket
relating to the design of spare parts. efficiency, mixability and inter-
Airbus is aiming to build closer links with changeability which includes spare part
its customers to focus on the parts which definition and spare part design.
have the greatest cost impacts on its
customers.
35
ELECTRICAL INSTALLATIONS - PAST TO FUTURE
Concorde is a turbojet-powered Concorde is easily recognizable This magnificent aircraft was
supersonic passenger airliner with its drooping nose which manufactured by the former
and first flown in 1969. It was a compromise between the Aerospatiale and British Aircraft
entered into service in 1976 and need for a streamlined design Corporation companies.
continued commercial flights for to reduce drag and increase In French, the common noun
27 years. Twenty aircraft have aerodynamic efficiency in flight, ‘concorde’ means "agreement,
been built. Concorde was the and the need for the pilot harmony, or peace".
first airliner to have a Fly-By- to see properly during
Wire Flight Control system. Its taxi, take-off and
avionics were unique because it landing operations.
was the first commercial aircraft
to employ hybrid circuits.
Concorde’s maximum cruising
altitude was of 60,000 feet
(18,000 m), subsonic airliners
typically cruising below
40,000 feet (12,000 m).
baL
otohP
tseT
thgilF
subriA
fo
ysetruoc
sotohP
This picture - which can easily
remind you that it’s close to lunch
time and that you’re starving for a
delicious plate of spaghetti after
having read the FAST magazine -
shows not less than the kilometres
of electrical wire installed on
aircraft.
This particular photo was taken
during the Concorde’s first
electrical cables' dismantlement in
April 1976.
No doubt that the use of the
optical fibre technology (article
page 14) will help reduce the
amount of tangled cables on future
aircraft.
74
TSAF
36
74
TSAF
FAST47.qxp:FAST MASTER LAYOUT 20/12/10 10:20 Page 36
36
74
TSAF
FAST47_COUV.qxp:couvFAST41 rectoverso 06/01/11 11:37 Page 4
CUSTOMER SERVICES WORLDWIDE AROUND THE CLOCK... AROUND THE WORLD
WORLDWIDE
Services & Customer Support
Tel:+33 (0)5 67 19 19 80
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 18 18
USA/CANADA
Customer Services
Tel: +1 703 834 3484
Fax:+1 703 834 3464
CHINA
Customer Services
Tel:+86 10 8048 6161 Ext 5020
Fax:+86 10 8048 6162
RESIDENT CUSTOMER SUPPORT ADMINISTRATION
Field Service Management
RCSM location Country
Tel:+33 (0)5 67 19 04 13
Abu Dhabi United Arab Emirates RCSM location Country
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 49 64
Alexandria Egypt Los Angeles United States of America
TECHNICAL, MATERIAL LOGISTICS Algiers Algeria Louisville United States of America
Almaty Kazakhstan Luton United Kingdom
& TRAINING SUPPORT
Amman Jordan Luxembourg Luxembourg
Airbus has its main Material Logistics centre Amsterdam Netherlands Madrid Spain
in Hamburg, and regional warehouses Astana Kazakhstan Manama Bahrain
in Frankfurt, Washington D.C., Dubai, Beijing, Athens Greece Manchester United Kingdom
Shanghai and Singapore. Atlanta United States of America Manilla Philippines
Auckland New Zealand Marrakech Morocco
Airbus operates 24 hours a day every day. Bangkok Thailand Mauritius Mauritius
Barcelona Spain Melbourne Australia
Airbus Technical AOG Centre (AIRTAC)
Beijing China Memphis United States of America
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 34 00 Beirut Lebanon Mexico City Mexico
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 35 00 Berlin Germany Miami United States of America
airtac@airbus.com Bogota Colombia Minneapolis United States of America
Brisbane Australia Montreal Canada
Spares AOGs in Americas should be
Bucharest Romania Moscow Russia
addressed to:
Budapest Hungary Mumbai India
Tel:+1 703 729 9000 Buenos Aires Argentina Muscat Oman
Fax:+1 703 729 4373 Cairo Egypt Nanjing China
aog.na@airbus.com Casablanca Morocco New Delhi India
Charlotte United States of America Newcastle Australia
Spares AOGs outside Americas
Chengdu China New York United States of America
should be addressed to: Chicago United States of America Paris France
Tel:+49 (0)40 5076 4001 Cologne Germany Phoenix United States of America
Fax:+49 (0)405076 4011 Colombo Sri Lanka Prague Czech Republic
aog.spares@airbus.com Dakar Senegal Quito Ecuador
Dhaka Bangladesh Riyadh Saudi Arabia
Spares related HMV issues outside Doha Qatar Roma Italy
North America should be addressed to: Dubai United Arab Emirates San Francisco United States of America
Tel:+49 (0)40 5076 4003 Dublin Ireland San Salvador El Salvador
Fax:+49 (0)40 5076 4013 Dusseldorf Germany Sana’a Yemen
hmv.spares@airbus.com Fort Lauderdale United States of America Santiago Chile
Frankfurt Germany Sao Paulo Brazil
Airbus Training Centre Toulouse, France Guangzhou China Seoul South Korea
Tel:+33 (0)5 61 93 33 33 Haikou China Shanghai China
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 Hamburg Germany Sharjah United Arab Emirates
Hangzhou China Shenyang China
Airbus Maintenance Training Centre Hanoi Vietnam Shenzhen China
Hamburg, Germany Helsinki Finland Singapore Singapore
Tel: +49 (0)40 7438 8288 Hong Kong S.A.R. China Sofia Bulgaria
Fax:+49 (0)40 7438 8588 Honolulu United States of America Sydney Australia
Indianapolis United States of America Taipei Taiwan
Airbus Training subsidiaries Istanbul Turkey Tashkent Uzbekistan
Miami, Florida - U.S.A. Jakarta Indonesia Tehran Iran
Tel:+1 305 871 36 55 Jeddah Saudi Arabia Tel Aviv Israel
Fax:+1 305 871 46 49 Johannesburg South Africa Tokyo Japan
Karachi Pakistan Toluca Mexico
Beijing, China
Kita-Kyushu Japan Toulouse France
Tel:+86 10 80 48 63 40 Kuala Lumpur Malaysia Tripoli Libya
Fax:+86 10 80 48 65 76 Kuwait City Kuwait Tunis Tunisia
Lagos Nigeria Vienna Austria Bangalore, India (Maintenance training)
Lima Peru Washington United States of America Tel: +33 (0)5 61 93 33 33
Lisbon Portugal Xi'an China
Fax:+33 (0)5 61 93 20 94 London United Kingdom Zurich Switzerland
37
FAST47_COUV.qxp:couvFAST41 rectoverso 20/12/10 11:15 Page 1
